the Emperor of all maladies prologue
diseases desperate grown by desperate
Appliance are relieved or not at all
William Shakespeare Hamlet cancer begins
and ends with people in the midst of
scientific abstraction it is sometimes
possible to forget this one basic fact
doctors treat diseases but they also
treat people and this precondition of
their professional existence sometimes
pulls them in two directions at once
June Goodfield on the morning of May
19th 2004 Carla Reed a 30-year-old
kindergarten teacher from ipswitch
Massachusetts a mother of three young
children woke up in bed with a headache
not just any headache she would recall
later but a sort of numbness in my head
the kind of numbness that instantly
tells you that something is terribly
wrong something had been terribly wrong
for nearly a month late in April Carla
had discovered a a few bruises on her
back they had suddenly appeared one
morning like strange Stigmata then groan
and vanished over the next month leaving
large map-- shaped marks on her back
almost IND discernably her gums had
begun to turn white by early May Carla a
vivacious energetic woman accustomed to
spending hours in the classroom chasing
down five and six-year-olds could barely
walk up a flight of stairs some morning
exhausted and unable to stand up she
crawled down the hallways of her house
on all fours to get from one room to
another she slept fitfully for 12 or 14
hours a day then woke up feeling so
overwhelmingly tired that she needed to
haul herself back to the couch again to
sleep Carla and her husband saw a
general physician and a nurse twice
during those four weeks but she returned
each time with no tests and without a
diagnosis ghostly pains appeared and
disapp appeared in Her Bones the doctor
fumbled about for some explanation
perhaps it was a migraine she suggested
and asked Carla to try some aspirin the
aspirin simply worsened the bleeding in
Carla's white gums outgoing gregarious
and a bullant Carla was more puzzled
than worried about her waxing and waning
illness she had never been seriously ill
in her life the hospital was an abstract
place for her she had never met met or
consulted a medical specialist let alone
an oncologist she imagined and concocted
various causes to explain her symptoms
over work depression dyspepsia Neurosis
insomnia but in the end something
visceral arose inside her a seventh
sense that told Carla something acute
and catastrophic was brewing within her
body on the afternoon of May 19th Carla
dropped her three children with a
neighbor and drove herself back to the
clinic demanding to have some blood
tests her doctor ordered a routine test
to check her blood counts as the
technician drew a tube of blood from her
vein he looked closely at the blood's
color obviously intrigued watery pale
and dilute the liquid that welled out of
Carla's veins hardly resembled blood
Carla waited the rest of the day without
any news at a fish market the next
morning she received a call we need to
draw some blood again the nurse from the
clinic saidh should I come Carla asked
planning her hectic day she remembers
looking up at the clock on the wall a
half PB steak of salmon was warming in
her shopping basket threatening to spoil
if she left it out too long in the end
commonplace particulars make up Carla's
memories of illness the clock the
carpool the children a tube of pale
blood a Miss shower the fish in the Sun
the tightening tone of a voice on the
phone Carla cannot recall much of what
the nurse said only a general sense of
urgency come now she thinks the nurse
said come now I heard about Cara's case
at 7:00 on the morning of May 21st on a
train speeding between Kendall Square
and Charles Street in Boston the
sentence that flickered on my beeper had
the staccato and dead pen force of a
true medical emergency
Carla re/ new patient with leukemia sl14
teach floor SL please see as soon as you
arrive as the train shot out of a long
dark tunnel the glass towers of the
Massachusetts General Hospital suddenly
loomed into view and I could see the
windows of the 14th floor rooms Carla I
guessed was sitting in one of those
rooms by herself terrifyingly alone
outside the room a buzz of frantic
activity had probably begun tubes of
blood were shuttling between the ward
and the laboratories on the second floor
nurses were moving about with specimens
interns collecting data for morning
reports alarms beeping Pages being sent
out somewhere in the depths of the
hospital a microscope was flickering on
with the cells and Carla's blood coming
into Focus under its lens I can feel
relatively certain about all of this
because the arrival of a patient with
acute leukemia still sends a shiver down
the hospital spine
all the way from the cancer Wards on its
upper floors to the clinical
laboratories buried deep in the basement
leukemia is cancer of the white blood
cells cancer in one of its most
explosive violent incarnations as one
nurse on the wards often like to remind
her patients with this disease even a
paper cut is an emergency for an
oncologist in training to leukemia
represents a special incarnation of
cancer its Pace its acuity its
breathtaking inexorable Arc of growth
forces rapid often drastic decisions it
is terrifying to experience terrifying
to observe and terrifying to treat the
body invaded by leukemia is pushed to
its brittle physiological limit every
system heart lung blood working at the
knife edge of its performance the nurses
filled me in on the gaps in the story
blood tests performed by Carla's doctor
had revealed that her red cell count was
critically low less than a third of
normal instead of normal white cells her
blood was packed with millions of large
malignant white cells blasts in the
vocabulary of cancer her doctor having
finally stumbled upon the real diagnosis
had sent her to the Massachusetts
General Hospital in the long bare Hall
outside Carla's room in the antiseptic
gleam of the floor just mopped with
diluted bleach I ran through the list of
tests that would be needed on her blood
and mentally rehearsed the conversation
I would have with her there was I noted
ruul something rehearsed and robotic
even about my sympathy this was the 10th
month of my fellowship in oncology a
2-year immersive medical program to
train Cancer Specialists and I felt as
if I had gravitated to my lowest point
in those 10 indescribably poignant and
difficult months dozens of patients in
my care had died I felt I was slowly
becom coming inured to the deaths and
The
desolation vaccinated against the
constant emotional brunt there were
seven such cancer fellows at this
Hospital on paper we seemed like a
formidable Force graduates of five
medical schools and four teaching
hospitals 66 years of medical and
scientific training and 12 postgraduate
degrees among us but none of those years
or degrees could possibly have prepared
us for this training program medical
school
internship and residency had been
physically and emotionally grueling but
the first months of the fellowship
flicked away those memories as if all of
that had been Child's Play the
kindergarten of Medical Training cancer
was an all-consuming presence in our
lives it invaded our
imaginations it occupied our memories it
infiltrated every conversation every
thought and if we as Physicians found
ourselves immersed in cancer then our
patients found their lives virtually
obliterated by the disease in Alexander
sanon's novel Cancer Ward Pavo nicolich
rusinov a youthful Russian in his
mid-40s discovers that he has a tumor in
his neck and is immediately whisked away
into a Cancer Ward in some nameless
Hospital in The Frigid North the
diagnosis of cancer not the disease but
the mere stigma of its presence becomes
a death sentence for rusanov the illness
strips him of his identity it dresses
him in a patient smok a tragic comically
cruel costume no less blighting than a
prisoner's jumpsuit and assumes absolute
control of his actions to be diagnosed
with cancer rusanov discovers is to
enter a borderless medical Gulag a state
even more invasive and paralyzing than
the one that he has left behind Solan
niten may have intended his absurdly
totalitarian cancer hospital to parallel
the absurdly totalitarian state outside
it yet when I once asked a woman with
invasive cervical cancer about the
parallel she said sardonically
unfortunately I did not need any
metaphors to read the book the Cancer
Ward was my confining state my prison as
a doctor learning to tend cancer
patience I had only a partial glimpse of
this confinement but even skirting its
periphery I could still feel its power
the dense insistent gravitational tug
that pulls everything and everyone into
the orbit of answer a colleague freshly
out of his Fellowship pulled me aside on
my first week to offer some advice it's
called an immersive training program he
said lowering his voice but by immersive
they really mean drowning don't let it
work its way into everything you do have
a life outside the hospital you'll need
it or you'll get swallowed but it was
impossible not to be swallowed in the
parking lot of the hospital a chilly
concrete box lit by Neon flood lights I
spent the end of every evening after
rounds in stunned incoherence the car
radio crackling vacantly in the
background as I compulsively tried to
reconstruct the events of the day the
stories of my patience consumed me and
the decisions that I made haunted me was
it worthwhile continuing yet another
round of chemotherapy on a 66-year-old
pharmacist with lung cancer who had
failed all other drugs was this better
to try a tested and potent combination
of drugs on a
26-year-old woman with Hodgkins disease
and risk losing her fertility or to
choose a more experimental combination
that might spare it should a
Spanish-speaking mother of three with
colon cancer be enrolled in a new
clinical trial when she can barely read
the formal and inscrutable language of
the consent forms immersed in the
day-to-day management of cancer I could
only see the lives and fates of my
patients played out in color saturated
detail like a television with the
contrast turned too high I could not pan
back from the screen I knew
instinctively that these experiences
were part of a much larger battle
against cancer but its Contours lay far
outside my reach I had a novice's hunger
for history but also a novice's
inability to Envision it but as I
emerged from the strange desolation of
those two Fellowship years the questions
about the larger story of cancer merged
with urgency how old is cancer what are
the roots of our battle against this
disease or as patients often asked me
where are we in the war on cancer how
did we get here is there an end can this
war even be one this book grew out of
the attempt to answer these questions I
delved into the history of cancer to
give shape to the shape-shifting illness
that I was confronting I used the past
to explain the present the isolation and
rage of a 36-year-old woman with stage
three breast cancer had ancient echoes
in atasa the Persian Queen who swaddled
her cancer affected breast in cloth to
hide it and then in a fit of nihilistic
and pression Fury had a slave cut it off
with a knife a patient's desire to
amputate her stomach ridden with cancer
sparing nothing as she put it to me
carried the memory of the Perfection
obsessed 19th century surgeon William
holstead who had chiseled away at cancer
with larger and more disfiguring
surgeries all in the hopes that cutting
more would mean curing more roing
underneath these medical cultural and
metaphorical interceptions of cancer
over the centuries was the biological
understanding of the illness and
understanding that had morphed often
radically from decade to decade cancer
we now know is a disease caused by the
uncontrolled growth of a single cell
this growth is Unleashed by mutations ch
changes in DNA that specifically affect
genes that inight unlimited cell growth
in a normal cell powerful genetic
circuits regulate cell division and cell
death in a cancer cell these circuits
have been broken unleashing a cell that
cannot stop growing that this seemingly
simple mechanism cell growth without
barriers can lie at the heart of this
grotesque and multifaceted illness is a
testament to the unfathomable power of
cell growth cell division allows us as
organism to grow to adapt to recover to
repair to live and distorted and
Unleashed it allows cancer cells to grow
to flourish to adapt to recover and to
repair to live at the cost of our living
cancer cells grow faster adapt better
they are more perfect versions of
ourselves the secret to battling cancer
then is to find means to prevent these
mutations from occurring in susceptible
cells or to find means to eliminate the
mutated cells without compromising
normal growth the conciseness of that
statement belies the enormity of the
task malignant growth and normal growth
are so genetically intertwined that
unbraiding the two might be one of the
most significant scientific challenges
faced by our species cancer is built
into our genomes the genes that UNM more
normal cell division are not foreign to
our bodies but rather mutated distorted
versions of the very genes that perform
vital cellular functions and cancer is
imprinted in our society as we extend
our lifespan as a species we inevitably
unleash malignant growth mutations and
cancer genes accumulate with aging
cancer is thus intrinsically related to
age if we seek immortality then so too
in a rather perverse sense does the
cancer cell how precisely a future
generation might learn to separate the
entwined strands of normal growth from
malignant growth remains a mystery
the universe the 20th century biologist
JBS haldane like to say is not only
queerer than we suppose but queerer than
we can suppose and so is the trajectory
of science but this much is certain the
story however it plays out will contain
indelible kernels of the past it will be
a story of inventiveness resilience and
perseverance against what one writer
called the most Relentless and Insidious
enemy
among human diseases but it will also be
a story of hubris arrogance paternalism
misperception false hope and hype all
leveraged against an illness that was
just three decades ago widely touted as
being curable within a few years in the
bare hospital room ventilated by
sterilized air Carla was fighting her
own war on cancer when I arrived she was
sitting with peculiar calm on her bed a
school teacher jotting notes but what
notes she would later recall I just
wrote and rewrote the same thoughts her
mother redyed and tearful just off an
overnight flight burst into the room and
then sat silently in a chair by the
window rocking forcefully the D of
activity around Carla had become almost
a blur nurse is shuttling fluids in and
out interns donning masks and gowns
antibiotics being hung on four poles to
be dripped into her veins I explained
the situation as best I could her day
ahead would be full of tests a hurdle
from one lab to another I would draw a
bone marrow sample more tests would be
run by Pathologists but the preliminary
tests suggested that Carla had acute
lymphoblastic leukemia it is one of the
most common forms of cancer in children
but rare in adults and it is I paused
here for EMP empis lifting my eyes up
often curable curable Carla nodded at
that word her eyes sharpening inevitable
questions hung in the room how curable
what were the chances that she would
survive how long would the treatment
take I laid out the odds once the
diagnosis had been confirmed
chemotherapy would begin immediately and
last more than one year her chances of
being cured were about 30%
a little less than 1 in three we spoke
for an hour perhaps longer it was now
9:30 in the morning the city below us
had stirred fully awake the door shut
behind me as I left and a whoosh of air
blew me outward and sealed Carla in part
one of black choler without boiling in
solving a problem of this sort the grand
thing is to be able to reason backwards
that is a very useful accomplishment and
a very easy one but people do not
practice it much Sherlock Holmes in Sir
Arthur Conan doy a study in Scarlet a
suppuration of blood Physicians of the
utmost Fame were called at once but when
they came they answered as they took
their fees there is no cure for this
disease hir Bellic pation is a daily
task its cure of fervent hope William
Castle describing leukemia in 1950 in a
damp 14x 20ft laboratory in Boston on a
December morning in
1947 a man named Sydney Farber waited
impatiently for the arrival of a parcel
from New York the laboratory was little
more than a chemist's closet a poorly
ventilated room buried in a half
basement of the Children's Hospital
almost thrust into its back alley a few
hundred feet away the hospital's medical
Wards were slowly thrumming to work
children in white smoks moved restlessly
on small rot iron cots doctors and
nurses shuttled busily between the rooms
checking charts writing orders and
dispensing medicines but farber's lab
was listless and empty a bare Warren of
chemicals and glass jars connected to
the main hospital through a series of
icy corridors the sharp stench of
embalming formalin wafted through the
air there were no patients in the rooms
here just the bodies and tissues of
patients brought down through the
tunnels for autopsies and examinations
Farber was a pathologist his job
involved dissecting specimens performing
autopsies identifying cells and
diagnosing diseases but never treating
patients farber's specialty was
pediatric pathology the study of
children's diseases he had spent nearly
20 years in these Subterranean rooms
staring obsessively down his microscope
and climbing through the academic ranks
to become chief of pathology at
Children's but for Farber pathology was
becoming a disjunctive form of medicine
a discipline more preoccupied with the
dead than with the living Farber now
felt impatient watching illness from its
Sidelines never touching or treating a
live patient he was tired of tissues and
cells he felt trapped emomed in his own
glassy cabinet and so Farber had decided
to make a drastic professional switch
instead of squinting at inert specimens
under his lens he would try to LEAP into
the life of the clinics upstairs from
the microscopic world that he knew so
well into the magnified real world of
patients and illnesses he would try to
use the knowledge he had gathered from
his pathological specimens to devise new
therapeutic interventions the parcel
from New York contained a few vials of a
yellow crystallin chemical named
aminopterin it had been shipped to his
laboratory in Boston on the slim hope
that it might halt the growth of
leukemia in children had Farber asked
any of the pediatricians circulating in
the wards above him about the likelihood
of developing an anti-leukemic drug they
would have advised him not to bother
trying childhood leukemia had fascinated
confused and frustrated doctors for more
than a century the disease had been
analyzed classified subclassified and
subdivided meticulously in the musty
leatherbound books on the Library
shelves at Children's Anderson's
pathology or Boyd's pathology of
internal diseases page upon page was
plastered with images of leukemia cells
and appended with elaborate taxonomies
to describe the cells yet all this
knowledge only Amplified the sense of
medical helplessness the disease had
turned into an object of empty
Fascination a wax museum doll studied
and photographed in Exquisite detail but
without any therapeutic or practical
advances it gave Physicians plenty to
Wrangle over at Medical meetings an
oncologist recalled but it did not help
their patients at all a patient with
acute leukemia was brought to the
hospital in a flurry of excitement
discussed on medical rounds with
professorial grandiosity and then as a
medical magazine drill noted diagnosed
transfused and sent home to Die the
study of leukemia had been mired in
confusion and despair ever since its
discovery on March 19
1845 a Scottish physician John Bennett
had described an unusual case a
28-year-old slate layer with a
mysterious swelling in his
spleen he is of dark complexion Bennett
wrote of his patient usually healthy and
temperate he states that 20 months ago
he was affected with great listlessness
on exertion which has continued to this
time in June last he noticed a tumor in
the left side of his abdomen which has
gradually increased in size till 4
months since when it became stationary
the Slate layer's tumor might have
reached its final stationary point but
his constitutional troubles only
accelerated over the next few weeks
Bennett's patient spiraled from symptom
to symptom fevers flashes of bleeding
sudden fits of abdominal pain gradually
at first then on a tighter faster Arc
caring from one bout to another soon the
Slate layer was on the verge of death
with more swollen t rumors sprouting in
his armpits his groin and his neck he
was treated with the customary leeches
and purging but to no avail at the
autopsy a few weeks later Bennett was
convinced that he had found the reason
behind the symptoms his patient blood
was chock full of white blood cells
white blood cells the principal
constituent of pus typically signal the
response to an infection and Bennett
reasoned that the Slate layer had
succumbed to one the following case
seems to me particularly valuable he
wrote self assuredly as it will serve to
demonstrate the existence of true pus
formed universally within the vascular
system it would have been a perfectly
satisfactory explanation except that
Bennett could not find a source for the
pus during the necropsy he poured
carefully through the body combing the
tissues and organs for signs of an
abscess or wound but no other Stigmata
of infection were to be found the blood
had apparently spoiled separated of its
own will combusted spontaneously into
true pus a suppuration of blood Bennett
called his case and he left it at that
Bennett was wrong of course about his
spontaneous suppuration of blood a
little over 4 months after Bennett had
described the Slater's illness a
24-year-old German researcher Rudolph
fko independently published a case
Report with striking similarities to
Bennett's case fco's patient was a cook
in her mid-50s white cells had
explosively overgrown her blood forming
dense and pulpy pools in her spleen at
her autopsy Pathologists had likely not
even needed a microscope to distinguish
the thick milky layer of white cells
floating above the red FCO who knew of
Bennett's case couldn't bring himself to
believe Bennett's Theory blood FCO
argued had no reason to transform
impetuously into anything moreover the
unusual symptoms bothered him what of
the massively enlarged spleen or the
absence of any wound or source of pus in
the body fko began to wonder if the
blood itself was abnormal unable to find
a unifying explanation for it and
seeking a name for this condition FCO
ultimately settled for Weiss's BL white
blood no more than a literal description
of the million of white cells he had
seen under his microscope in
1847 he changed the name to the more
academic sounding leukemia from lucose
the Greek word for white renaming the
disease from the fluid separation of
blood to the flat Weiss's blood hardly
seems like an act of scientific genius
but it had a profound impact on the
understanding of leukemia an illness at
the moment of its Discovery is a fragile
idea a hot house FL flower deeply
disproportionately influenced by names
and
classifications more than a century
later in the early 1980s another change
in name from gay related immune disease
grid to acquired imuno deficiency
syndrome aids would signal an epic shift
in the understanding of that disease
like Bennett fko didn't understand
leukemia but unlike Bennett he didn't
pretend to understand it his Insight lay
entirely in the negative by wiping the
Slate clean of all preconceptions he
cleared the field for thought the
humility of the name and the underlying
humility about his understanding of
cause epitomized fco's approach to
medicine as a young Professor at the
University of wsur fco's work soon
extended far beyond naming leukemia a
pathologist by training he launched a
project that would occupy him for his
life describing human diseases in simple
cellular terms it was a project born of
frustration FCO entered medicine in the
early 1840s when nearly every disease
was attributed to the workings of some
invisible force my asthmas Neurosis bad
humors and hysteria perplexed by what he
couldn't see fko turned with
revolutionary Zeal to what he could see
cells under the microscope in 1838 Maas
schleiden a botanist and Theodore Schwan
a physiologist both working in Germany
had claimed that all living organisms
were built out of fundamental building
blocks called cells borrowing and
extending this idea fko set out to
create a cellular theory of human
biology basing it on two fundamental
tenants first that human bodies like the
bodies of all animals and plants were
made up of cells second that cells only
arose from other cells omnic cellular e
cellula as he put it the two tenants
might have seemed simplistic but they
allowed FCO to propose a crucially
important hypothesis about the nature of
human growth if cells only arose from
other cells then growth could occur in
only two ways either by increasing cell
numbers or by increasing cell size FCO
called these two modes hyperplasia and
hypertrophy in hypertrophy the number of
cells did not change instead each
individual cell merely grew in size like
a balloon being blown up hyperplasia in
contrast was growth by virtue of cells
increasing in number every growing human
tissue could be described in terms of
hypertrophy and hyperplasia in adult
animals fat and muscle usually grow by
hypertrophy in contrast the liver blood
the gut and the skin all grow through
hyperplasia cells becoming cells
becoming more cells omnic cellular e
cellula e cellula that explanation was
persuasive and it provoked a new
understanding not just of normal growth
but of pathological growth as well like
normal growth pathological growth could
also be achieved through hypertrophy and
hyperplasia when the heart muscle is
forced to push against a blocked aortic
Outlet it often adapts by making every
muscle cell bigger to generate more
Force eventually resulting in a heart so
overgrown that it may be unable to
function normally pathological
hypertrophy conversely and importantly
for this story FCO soon stumbled upon
the quintessential disease of
pathological hyperplasia cancer looking
at cancerous growths through his
microscope FCO discovered an
uncontrolled growth of cells hyperplasia
in its extreme form as FCO examined the
architecture of cancers the growth often
seemed to have acquired a life of its
own as if the cells had become possessed
by a new and mysterious drive to grow
this was not just ordinary growth but
growth redefined growth in a new form
prly although oblivious of the mechanism
FCO called it neoplasia noal
inexplicable distorted growth a word
that would ring through the history of
cancer by the time fko died in 1902 a
new theory of cancer had slowly
coalesced out of all these observations
cancer was a disease of pathological
hyperplasia in which cells acquired an
autonomous will to divide this aarant
uncontrolled cell division created
masses of of tissue tumors that invaded
organs and destroyed normal tissues
these tumors could also spread from one
site to another causing outcroppings of
the disease called metastases in distant
sites such as the bones the brain or the
lungs cancer came in diverse forms
breast stomach skin and cervical cancer
leukemias and lymphomas but all these
diseases were deeply connected at the
cellular level in every case
cells had all acquired the same
characteristic uncontrollable
pathological cell division with this
understanding Pathologists who studied
leukemia in the late 1880s now circled
back to fco's work leukemia then was not
a suppuration of blood but neoplasia of
blood Bennett's earlier fantasy had
germinated an entire field of fantasies
among scientists who had gone searching
and dutifully found all sorts of
invisible parasites and bacteria
bursting out of leukemia cells but once
Pathologists stopped looking for
infectious causes and refocused their
lenses on the disease they discovered
the obvious analogies between leukemia
cells and cells of other forms of cancer
leukemia was a malignant proliferation
of white cells in the blood it was
cancer in a molten liquid form with that
seminal observation the study of
leukemia suddenly found Clarity and
spurted forward by the early 1900s it
was clear that the disease came in
several forms it could be chronic and
indolent slowly choking the bone marrow
and spleen as in fco's original case
later termed chronic leukemia or it
could be acute and violent almost a
different illness in its personality
with flashes of fever paroxysmal fits of
bleeding and a dazzlingly rapid
overgrowth of cells as in Bennett's
patient this second version of the
disease called acute leukemia came in
two further subtypes based on the type
of cancer cell involved normal white
cells in the blood can be broadly
divided into two types of cells myoid
cells or lymphoid cells acute myoid
leukemia AML was a cancer of the myoid
cells acute lymphoblastic leukemia all
was cancer of immature lymphoid cells
cancers of more mature lymphoid cells
are called lymphomas in children
leukemia was most commonly all
lymphoblastic Leukemia and was almost
always swiftly lethal in 1860 a student
of fos Michael Anton bermer described
the first known case of this form of
childhood leukemia Maria Spire an
energetic vivacious and playful
5-year-old daughter of a Wartburg
Carpenter was initially seen at the
clinic because she had become lethargic
in school and developed bloody bruises
on her skin the next morning she she
developed a stiff neck and a fever
precipitating a call to beerer for a
home visit that night beerer drew a drop
of blood from Maria's veins looked at
the smear using a canit bedside
microscope and found millions of
leukemia cells in the blood Maria slept
fitfully late into the evening late the
next afternoon as beerer was excitedly
showing his colleagues the specimens of
Exquisite Fon Lamy an Exquisite case of
leukemia Maria vomited bright red blood
and lapsed into a coma by the time
beerer returned to her house that
evening the child had been dead for
several hours from its first symptom to
diagnosis to death her Galloping
Relentless illness had lasted no more
than 3 days although nowhere as
aggressive as Maria spire's leukemia
Carla's illness was astonishing in its
own right adults on average have about
5,000 white blood cells circulating per
milliliter of blood Carla's blood
contained 90,000 cells per milliliter
nearly 20 fold the normal level 95% of
these cells were blasts malignant
lymphoid cells produced at a frenetic
Pace but unable to mature into fully
developed lymphocytes in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia as in some other
cancers the overproduction of cancer
cells is combined with a mysterious
arrest in the normal maturation of cells
lymphoid cells are thus produced in vast
excess but unable to mature they cannot
fulfill their normal function in
fighting microbes Carla had
immunological poverty in the face of
Plenty white blood cells are produced in
the bone marrow Carla's bone marrow
biopsy which I saw under the microscope
the morning after I first met her was
deeply abnormal although superficially
amorphus bone marrow is a highly
organized tissue and organ in truth that
generates blood adults typically bone
marrow biopsies contain spicules of bone
and within these spicules islands of
growing blood cells nurseries for the
Genesis of new blood in Carla marrow
this organization had been fully
destroyed sheet upon sheet of malignant
blasts packed the marrow space
obliterating all anatomy and
architecture leaving no space for any
production of blood Carla was at the
edge of a physiological Abyss her red
cell count had dipped so low that her
blood was unable to carry its full
supply of oxygen her headaches in
retrospect were the first sign of oxygen
deprivation her platelets the cells
responsible for clotting blood had
collapsed to nearly zero causing her
bruises her treatment would require
extraordinary finesse she would need
chemotherapy to kill her leukemia but
the chemotherapy would collaterally
decimate any Remnant normal blood cells
we would push her deeper into the abyss
to try to rescue her for Carla the only
way out would be the way through Sydney
Farber was born in Buffalo New York in
1903 one year after fco's death in
Berlin his father Simon Farber a former
bargan in Poland had immigrated to
America in the late 19th century and
worked in an insurance agency the family
lived in modest circumstances at the
Eastern edge of town
in a tight-knit insular and often
economically precarious Jewish community
of shop owners Factory workers
bookkeepers and Peddlers pushed
relentlessly to succeed the Farber
children were held to high academic
standards Yiddish was spoken upstairs
but only German and English were allowed
downstairs the Elder Farber often
brought home textbooks and Scattered
them across the dinner table expecting
each child to select and master one book
then provide a detailed report for him
Sydney the thir of 14 children thrived
in this environment of high aspirations
he studied both biology and philosophy
in college and graduated from the
University of Buffalo in
1923 playing the violin at music Halls
to support his college education fluent
in German he trained in medicine at
heidleberg and fryberg then having
excelled in Germany found a spot as a a
second-year medical student at Harvard
Medical School in Boston the circular
Journey from New York to Boston via
heidleberg Was Not Unusual in the mid
1920s Jewish students often found it
impossible to secure Medical School
spots in America often succeeding in
European even German medical schools
before returning to study medicine in
their native country Farber thus arrived
at Harvard as an outsider his colleagues
found him arrogant and insufferable but
he too relearning lessons that he had
already learned seemed to be suffering
through it all he was formal precise and
meticulous starched in his appearance
and his mannerisms and commanding in
presence he was promptly nicknamed forb
button Sid for his propensity for
wearing formal suits to his classes
Farber completed his Advanced Training
in pathology in the late 1920s and
became the first full-time pathologist
at the Children's Hospital in Boston
he wrote a marvelous study on the
classification of children's tumors and
a textbook the postmortem examination
widely considered a classic in the field
by the mid
1930s he was firmly ensconced in the
back alleys of the hospital as a
preeminent pathologist day doctor of the
Dead Yet the hunger to treat patients
still drove Farber and sitting in his
basement laboratory in the summer of
1947 Farber had a single inspired idea
he chose among all cancers to focus his
attention on one of its oddest and most
hopeless variants childhood leukemia to
understand cancer as a whole He reasoned
you needed to start at the bottom of its
complexity in its basement and despite
its many
idiosyncrasies leukemia possessed a
singularly attractive feature it could
be measured science begins with counting
to understand a phenomenon a scientist
must first describe it to describe it
objectively he must first measure it if
cancer medicine was to be transformed
into a rigorous science then cancer
would need to be counted somehow
measured in some reliable reproducible
way in this leukemia was different from
nearly every other type of cancer in a
world before CT scans and MRIs
quantifying the change in size of an
internal solid tumor in the lung or the
breast was virtually impossible without
surgery you could not measure what you
could not see but leukemia floating
freely in the blood could be measured as
easily as blood cells by drawing a
sample of blood or bone marrow and
looking at it under a microscope if
leukemia could be counted Farber
reasoned then any intervention a
chemical scent circulating through the
blood say could be evaluated for its
potency in living patients he could
watch cells grow or die in the blood and
use that to measure the success or
failure of a drug he could perform an
experiment on cancer the idea mesmerized
Farber in the 1940s and 50s young
biologists were galvanized by the idea
of using simple models to understand
complex phenomena complexity was best
understood by building from the ground
up single- celled organisms such as
bacteria would reveal the workings of
massive multicellular animals such as
humans what is true for E Ki a
microscopic bacterium the French
biochemist Mano would grandly declare in
1954 must also be true for elephants for
Farber leukemia epitomized this
biological Paradigm from this simple
atypical Beast he would extrapolate into
the vastly more complex world of other
cancers the bacterium would teach him to
think about the elephant he was by
Nature a quick and often impulsive
thinker and here too he made a quick
instinctual leap the package from New
York was way in in his laboratory that
December morning as he tore it open
pulling out the glass vials of chemicals
he scarcely realized that he was
throwing open an entirely new way of
thinking about cancer although the link
between microorganisms and infection was
yet to be established the connection
between pusp purulence and sepsis fever
and death often arising from an abscess
or wound was welln to Bennett the
identification of HIV as the pathogen
and the rapid spread of the virus across
the globe soon laid to rest the
initially observed and culturally loaded
prediliction for gay men FCO did not
coin the word although he offered a
comprehensive description of neoplasia a
monster more insatiable than the
guillotine the medical importance of
leukemia has always been
disproportionate to its actual incidence
indeed the problems encountered in the
systemic treatment of leukemia were
indicative of the general directions in
which cancer research as a whole was
headed Jonathan Tucker Ellie a child's
fight against leukemia there were few
successes in the treatment of
disseminated cancer it was usually a
matter of watching the tumor get bigger
and the patient progressively smaller
John llo The Cure of childhood leukemia
into the age of Miracles Sydney farber's
package of chemicals happened to arrive
at a particularly pivotal moment in the
history of medicine in the late
1940s a cornucopia of pharmaceutical
discoveries was tumbling open in labs
and clinics around the nation the most
iconic of these new drugs were the
antibiotics penicillin that precious
chemical that had to be milked to its
last droplet during World War II in 1939
the drug was reextracted from the urine
of patients who had been treated with it
to conserve every last molecule was by
the early 50s being produced in thousand
gallon Vats in
1942 when MK had shipped out its first
batch of penicillin a mere 5 and2 G of
the drug that amount had represented
half of the entire stock of the
antibiotic in America a decade later
penicillin was being mass produced so
effectively that its price had sunk to 4
cents for a dose 1/8 the cost of a half
gallon of milk new antibiotics followed
in the footsteps of penicillin chlorum
fenicle in
1947 tetracycline in 1948 in the winter
of 19 1949 when yet another miraculous
antibiotic streptomycin was purified out
of a clot of mold from a chicken
farmers's Barnyard Time Magazine
splashed the phrase the remedies are in
our own backyard prominently across its
cover in a brick building on the far
corner of Children's Hospital in
farber's own backyard a microbiologist
named John Enders was culturing polio
virus in Rolling plastic flasks the
first step that culminated in the
development of the Sabin and sock polio
vaccines new drugs appeared at an
astonishing rate by 1950 more than half
the medicines in common medical use had
been unknown merely a decade earlier
perhaps even more significant than these
Miracle drugs shifts in public health
and hygiene also drastically altered the
national physiognomy of illness typhoid
fever a contagion whose deadly swirl
could decimate entire districts in weeks
melted away as the putrid Water Supplies
of several cities were cleansed by
Massive Municipal efforts even
tuberculosis the infamous white plague
of the 19th century was Vanishing its
incidents plummeting by more than half
between 1910 and 1940 largely due to
better sanitation and public hygiene
efforts the life expectancy of Americans
Rose from 47 to 68 in half a century a
greater leap in longevity than had been
achieved over several previous centuries
the sweeping victories of post-war
medicine Illustrated the potent and
transformative capacity of Science and
Technology in American Life hospitals
proliferated between 1945 in 1960 nearly
1,000 new hospitals were launched
Nationwide between 1935 and 1952 the
number of patients admitted more than
doubled from 7 million to 17 million per
year and with the rise in medical care
came the concomitant expectation of
medical cure as one student observed
when a doctor has to tell a patient that
there is no specific remedy for his
condition the patient is apt to feel
affronted or to wonder whether the
doctor is keeping a breast of the times
in New and sanitized Suburban towns a
Young Generation thus dreamed of cures
of a death-free disease-free existence
lulled by the idea of the durability of
Life they threw themselves into
consuming durables boat siiz stud Bakers
rayon leisure suits televisions radios
vacation homes golf clubs barbecue
grills washing machines in levitown a
sprawling Suburban settlement built in a
potato field on Long Island a symbolic
Utopia illness now ranked third in a
list of worries falling behind finances
and child rearing in fact rearing
children was becoming a national
preoccupation at an unprecedented level
fertility Rose steadily by
1957 a baby was being born every 7
seconds in America the affluent society
as the economist John Galbraith
described it also imagined itself as
eternally young with an accompanying
guarantee of Eternal Health the
Invincible Society but of all diseases
cancer had refused to fall into step in
this March of progress if a tumor was
strictly local IE confined to a single
organ or site so that it could be
removed by a surgeon the cancer stood a
chance of being cured extrap as the
procedures came to be called were a
legacy of the dramatic advances of 19th
century surgery a solitary malignant
lump in the breast say could be removed
via a radical mastectomy pioneered by
the great surgeon William holstead at
Johns Hopkins in the 1890s with the
discovery of x-rays in the early 1900s
radiation could also be used to kill
tumor cells at local sites but
scientifically cancer still remained a
black box a mysterious entity that was
best cut away and block rather than
treated by some deeper medical insight
to cure cancer if it could be cured at
all doctors had only two strategies
excising the tumor surgically or
incinerating it with radiation a choice
between the hot Ray and the cold knife
in May
1937 almost exactly a decade before
Farber began his experiments with
chemicals Fortune Magazine published
what it called a panoramic survey of
cancer medicine the report was far from
comforting the startling fact is that no
new principle of treatment whether for
cure or prevention has been introduced
the methods of treatment have become
more efficient and more Humane crude
surgery without anesthesia or asepsis
has been replaced by modern painless
surgery with its Exquisite technical
refinement biting cosics that ate into
the Flesh of past generations of cancer
patients have been obsoleted by
radiation with ext and radium but the
fact remains that the cancer cure still
includes only two principles the removal
and destruction of disease tissue the
former by surgery the latter by x-rays
no other means have been proved the
fortune article was titled cancer the
great darkness and the Darkness the
author suggested was as much political
as medical cancer medicine was stuck in
a rut not only because of the depth of
medical Mysteries that surrounded it but
because of the systematic neglect of
cancer research there are not over two
dozen funds in the US devoted to
fundamental cancer research they range
in capital from about $500 up to about
$2 million but their aggregate
capitalization is certainly not much
more than $5 million the public
willingly spends a third of that sum in
an afternoon to watch a major football
game this stagnation of research funds
stood in stark contrast to the Swift
Rise to prominence of the disease itself
can can had certainly been present and
noticeable in 19th century America but
it had largely lurked in the shadow of
vastly more common illnesses in 1899
when Roswell Park a well-known Buffalo
surgeon had argued that cancer would
someday overtake smallpox typhoid fever
and tuberculosis to become the leading
cause of death in the nation his remarks
had been perceived as a rather startling
prophecy the hyperbolic speculations of
a man who after all spent his days and
nights operating on cancer but by the
end of the decade Park's remarks were
becoming less and less startling and
more and more prophetic by the day
typhoid aside from a few scattered
outbreaks was becoming increasingly rare
small pox was on the decline by 1949 it
would disappear from America altogether
meanwhile cancer was already out growing
other diseases ratcheting its way up the
ladder of killers between 19
1916 cancer related mortality grew by
29.8% edging out tuberculosis as a cause
of death by
1926 cancer had become the nation's
second most common killer just behind
heart disease cancer the great Darkness
wasn't alone in building a case for a
coordinated national response to cancer
in May that year life carried its own
dispatch on cancer research which
conveyed the same sense of urgency the
New York Times published two reports on
Rising cancer rates in April and June
when cancer appeared in the pages of
time in July
1937 interest in what was called the
cancer problem was like a fierce
contagion in the media proposals to
mount a systematic National Response
against cancer had risen and ebbed
rhythmically in America since the early
1900s in 1907 a group of cancer surgeons
had congregated at the new Hotel in
Washington to create an organization to
Lobby Congress for more funds for cancer
research by 1910 this organization the
American Association for cancer research
had convinced President Taft to propose
to Congress a National Laboratory
dedicated to cancer research but despite
initial interest in the plan the efforts
had stalled in Washington after a few
fitful attempts largely because of a
lack of political support in the late
1920s a decade after ta's proposal had
been tabled cancer research found a new
and unexpected Champion Matthew Neely a
dogged and a bullant former lawyer from
Fairmont West Virginia serving his first
term in the Senate although Neely had
relatively little experience in the
politics of science he had noted The
Marked increase in cancer mortality in
the previous decade from 70,000 men and
women in 1911 to 115,000 in 1927 Neely
asked Congress to advertise a reward of
$5 million for any information leading
to the arrest of human cancer it was a
low brow strategy the scientific
equivalent of hanging a mug shot in a
sheriff's office and it generated a
reflexively lowbrow response within a
few weeks ne's office in Washington was
flooded with thousands of letters from
quacks and Faith healers purporting
every conceivable remedy for cancer rubs
tonics ointments anointed handkerchiefs
salves and blessed water Congress
exasperated with the response finally
authorized
$50,000 for ne's cancer control Bill
almost comically cutting its budget back
to just 1% of the requested amount in
1937 the indefatigable neie reelected to
the Senate launched yet another effort
to launch a national attack on cancer
this time jointly with Senator Homer
bone and representative Warren Magnuson
by now cancer had considerably magnified
in the public eye the fortune and time
articles had fanned anxiety and
discontent and politicians were eager to
demonstrate a concrete response in June
a joint Senate house Conference was held
to craft legislation to address the
issue after initial hearings the bill
raced through Congress and was passed
unanimously by a joint session on July
23rd 1937 2 weeks later on August 5th
president Roosevelt signed the National
Cancer Institute act the Act created a
new scientific unit called the National
Cancer Institute NCI designed to
coordinate cancer research and education
an advisory Council of scientists for
The Institute was assembled from
universities and hospitals a
state-of-the-art laboratory space with
gleaming halls and conference rooms was
built among leafy arcades and Gardens in
Suburban Bethesda
a few miles from the nation's capital
the nation is marshalling its forces To
Conquer Cancer the greatest Scourge that
has ever assailed the human race Senator
bone announced reassuringly while
breaking ground for the building on
October 3rd 1938 after nearly two
decades of largely fruitless efforts a
coordinated national response to cancer
seemed to be on its way at last all of
this was a bold Brave step in the right
direction except for its timing
by the early winter of
1938 just months after the inauguration
of the NCI campus in Bethesda the battle
against cancer was overshadowed by the
Tremors of a different kind of war in
November Nazi troops embarked on a
nationwide pogram against Jews in
Germany forcing thousands into
concentration camps by late winter
military conflicts had broken out all
over Asia and Europe setting the stage
for World War II by 193 9 those
skirmishes had fully ignited and in
December
1941 America was drawn inextricably into
the global configration the war
necessitated a dramatic reordering of
priorities the US Marine Hospital in
Baltimore which the NCI had once hoped
to convert into a clinical Cancer Center
was now swiftly reconfigured into a war
Hospital scientific research funding
stagnated and was shunted into projects
directly relevant to the war scientists
lobbyists Physicians and surgeons fell
off the public radar screen mostly
silent as one researcher recalled their
contributions usually summarized in
obituaries an obituary might as well
have been written for the National
Cancer Institute congress's promised
funds for a programmatic response to
cancer never
materialized and the NCI languished in
neglect outfitted with every modern
facility imagin able in the
1940s the institute's sparkling campus
turned into a scientific Ghost Town one
scientist jokingly called it a nice
quiet place out here in the country in
those days the author continued it was
pleasant to drowse under the large Sunny
Windows the social outcry about cancer
also drifted into silence after the
brief flurry of attention in the Press
cancer again became the great
unmentionable the whisper about disease
that no one spoke about publicly in the
early 1950s Fanny Ros now a breast
cancer survivor and cancer Advocate
called The New York Times to post an
advertisement for a support group for
women with breast cancer Ros now was put
through puzzlingly to the society editor
of the newspaper when she asked about
placing her announcement a long pause
followed I'm Sorry Miss Rose now but the
times cannot publish the word breast or
the word cancer in its Pages perhaps the
editor continued you could say there
will be a meeting about diseases of the
chest wall Rose now hung up disgusted
when Farber entered the world of cancer
in
1947 the public outcry of the past
decade had dissipated cancer had again
become a politically silent illness in
the Airy Wards of the Children's
Hospital doctors and patients fought
their private battles against cancer in
the tunnels downstairs Farber fought an
even more private battle with his
chemicals and experiments this isolation
was key to farber's early success
insulated from the spotlights of public
scrutiny he worked on a small obscure
piece of the puzzle leukemia was an
orphan disease abandoned by internists
who had no drugs to offer for it and by
surgeons who could not possibly operate
on blood leukemia as one physician put
it in some senses had not even been
cancer before World War II the illness
lived on the Borderlands of illnesses a
pariah lurking between disciplines and
departments not unlike Farber himself if
leukemia belonged anywhere it was within
hematology the study of normal blood if
a cure for it was to be found Farber
reasoned it would be found by studying
blood if he could uncover how normal
blood cells were generated he might
stumble backward into a way to block the
growth of abnormal leukemic cells his
strategy then was to approach the
disease from the normal to the abnormal
to confront cancer in Reverse much of
what Farber knew about normal blood he
had learned from George minet a thin
balding Aristocrat with pale intense
eyes minet ran a laboratory in a colon
brick and stone structure off Harrison
Avenue in Boston just a few miles down
the the road from the sprawling Hospital
complex on Longwood Avenue that included
Children's Hospital like many
hematologists at Harvard Farber had
trained briefly with minet in the 1920s
before joining the staff at Children's
every decade has a unique hematological
riddle and for Min its era that riddle
was pernicious anemia anemia is the
deficiency of red blood cells and its
most common form arises from a lack of
iron a crucial nutrient used to build
red blood cells but pernicious anemia
the rare variant that minet studied was
not caused by iron deficiency indeed its
name derives from its intransigence to
the standard treatment of anemia with
iron by feeding patients increasingly
maob concoctions half a pound of chicken
liver half-cooked hamburgers raw hog
stomach and even once the regurgitated
gastric juices of one of his students
spiced up with butter lemon and parsley
minet and his team of researchers
conclusively demonst at in 1926 that
pernicious anemia was caused by the lack
of a critical micronutrient a single
molecule later identified as vitamin B12
in 1934 minet and two of his colleagues
won the Nobel Prize for this
path-breaking work minet had shown that
replacing a single molecule could
restore the normaly of blood in this
complex hematological disease blood was
an organ whose activity could be turned
on and off by molecular switches there
was another another form of nutritional
anemia that minet group had not tackled
an anemia just as pernicious although in
the moral sense of that word 8,000 M
away in the cloth Mills of Bombay owned
by English Traders and managed by their
Cutthroat local middlemen wages had been
driven to such low levels that the mill
workers lived in abject poverty
malnourished and without medical care
when English Physicians tested these
Mill workers in the 1920s to study the
effects of this chronic malnutrition
they discovered that many of them
particularly women after child birth
were severely anemic this was yet
another Colonial Fascination to create
the conditions of misery in a population
then subject it to social or medical
experimentation in 1928 a young English
physician named Lucy Wills freshly out
of the London school of medicine for
women traveled on a grant to Bombay to
study this anemia Wills was an exotic
among hematologists
an adventurous woman driven by a
powerful curiosity about blood willing
to travel to a far away country to solve
a mysterious anemia on a whim she knew
of minet's work but unlike minet's
anemia she found that the anemia in
Bombay couldn't be reversed by minet
concoctions or by vitamin B12
astonishingly she found she could cure
it with Marmite the dark yeasty spread
then popular among Health Fanatics in
England and Australia Wills could not
determine the key chemical nutrient of
Marmite she called it the wills Factor
Wills Factor turned out to be folic acid
or folate a vitamin-like substance found
in fruits and vegetables and amply in
Marmite when cells divide they need to
make copies of DNA the chemical that
carries all the genetic information in a
Cell folic acid is a crucial building
block for DNA and is thus vital for cell
division since blood cells are produced
by arguably the most fearsome rate of
cell division in the human body more
than 300 billion cells a day the Genesis
of blood is particularly dependent on
folic acid in its absence in men and
women starved to vegetables as in Bombay
the production of new blood cells in the
bone marrow halts millions of
half-matched cells spew out piling up
like half-finished Goods bottlenecked in
an assembly line the bone marrow becomes
a dysfunctional Mill a malnourished
biological Factory oddly reminiscent of
the cloth factories of Bombay these
links between vitamins bone marrow and
normal blood kept Farber preoccupied in
the early summer of
1946 in fact his first clinical
experiment inspired by this very
connection turned into a horrific
mistake Lucy Wills had observed that
folic acid if administered to nutrient
deprived patients could restore the
normal Genesis of blood Farber wondered
whether administering folic acid to
children with leukemia might also
restore normaly to their blood following
that tenuous Trail he obtained some
synthetic folic acid recruited a cohort
of leukemic children and started
injecting folic acid into them in the
months that passed Farber found that
folic acid far from stopping the
progression of lukemia actually
accelerated it in one patient the white
cell count nearly doubled in another the
leukemia cells exploded into the
bloodstream and sent fingerlings of
malignant cells to infiltrate the skin
Farber stopped the experiment in a hurry
he called this phenomenon acceleration
evoking some dangerous object in
freefall careering toward its end
pediatricians at Children's Hospital
were Furious about farber's Trial the
folate analogues had not just
accelerated the leukemia they had likely
hastened the death of the children
but Farber was intrigued if folic acid
accelerated the leukemia cells in
children what if he could cut off its
Supply with some other drug and
antifolate could a chemical that blocked
the growth of white blood cells stop
leukemia the observations of minet and
wills began to fit into a foggy picture
if the bone marrow was a busy cellular
Factory to begin with then a marrow
occupied with leukemia was that factory
in overdrive a deranged manufacturing
unit for cancer cells minet and wills
had turned the production lines of the
bone marrow on by adding nutrients to
the body but could the malignant marrow
be shut off by choking the supply of
nutrients could the anemia of the mill
workers in Bombay be recreated
therapeutically in the medical units of
Boston in his long walks from his
laboratory under Children's Hospital to
his house on amyy Street in Brookline
Farber wondered relentlessly about such
a drug dinner in the dark w panel rooms
of the house was usually a sparse
perfunctory Affair his wife Norma a
musician and writer talked about the
Opera and poetry Sydney of autopsies
trials and patience as he walked back to
the hospital at Night normous piano
tinkling practice scales in his wake the
prospect of an anti-cancer chemical
haunted him he imagined it palpably
visibly with a fanatic's enthus I ASM
but he didn't know what it was or what
to call it the word chemotherapy in the
sense we understand it today had never
been used for anti-cancer medicines the
elaborate armamentarium of
antivitamins that Farber had dreamed up
so vividly in his fantasies did not
exist Farber supply of folic acid for
his disastrous first trial had come from
the laboratory of an old friend a
chemist yela pragda subor yella as most
of his colleagues called him yellow was
a Pioneer in many ways a physician
turned cellular physiologist a chemist
who had accidentally wandered into
biology his scientific meanderings had
been pressed by more desperate and
adventuresome physical meanderings he
had arrived in Boston in 1923 penniless
and unprepared having finished his
medical training in India and secured a
scholarship for a diploma at the school
of tropical Health at Harvard the
weather in Boston discovered was far
from tropical unable to find a medical
job in The Frigid stormy winter he had
no license to practice medicine in the
United States he started as a night
Porter at the Brigham and Women's
Hospital opening doors changing sheets
and cleaning urinals the proximity to
Medicine paid off subar made friends and
connections at the hospital and switched
to a day job as a researcher in the
division of biochemistry his initial Pro
project involved purifying molecules out
of living cells dissecting them
chemically to determine their
compositions in essence performing a
biochemical autopsy on cells the
approach required more persistence than
imagination but it produced remarkable
dividends subar purified a molecule
called ATP the source of energy in all
living beings ATP carries chemical
energy in the cell and another molecule
called creatine the energy carrier in
muscle cells any one of these
achievements should have been enough to
guarantee him a professorship at Harvard
but sub barov was a foreigner a
reclusive nocturnal heavily accented
vegetarian who lived in a one- room
apartment down town befriended only by
other nocturnal recluses such as Farber
in 1940 denied tenure and recognition
yela huffed off to join letterly Labs a
pharmaceutical laboratory in Upstate New
York owned by the American camid
Corporation where he had been asked to
run a group on chemical synthesis at
letterly yel subar quickly reformulated
his old strategy and focused on making
synthetic versions of the natural
chemicals that he had found within cells
hoping to use them as nutritional
supplements in the 1920s another Drug
Company Eli Lily had made a fortune
selling a concentrated form of vitamin
B12 the missing nutrient in pernicious
anemia subar decided to Focus his
attention on the other anemia the
neglected anemia of folate deficiency
but in
1946 after many failed attempts to
extract the chemical from Pig's livers
he switched tactics and started to
synthesize folic acid from scratch with
the help of a team of scientists
including Harriet kilty a young chemist
at letterly the chemical reactions to
make folic acid brought a serendipitous
bonus since the reactions had several
intermediate steps subar and kilty could
create variants of folic acid through
slight alterations in the recipe these
variants of folic acid closely related
molecular mimics possessed
counterintuitive properties enzymes and
receptors in cells typically work by
recognizing molecules using their
chemical structure but a decoy molecular
structure one that nearly mimics the
natural molecule combine to the receptor
or enzyme and block its action like a
false key jamming a lock some of
yellow's molecular mimics could thus
behave like antagonists to folic acid
these were precisely the antivitamins
that Farber had been fantasizing about
Farber wrote to kilty and subar asking
them if he could use their folate
antagonists on patients with leukemia
subar consented in the late summer of
1947 the first package of antifolate
left Letter's labs in New York and
arrived in farber's laboratory in
1944 the NCI would become a subsidiary
component of the National Institutes of
Health ni IH this foreshadowed the
creation of other disease focused
institutes over the next decades in 1946
to minus 47 Neely and Senator Claude
pepper launched a third National Cancer
bill this was defeated in Congress by a
small margin in
1947 in New York in the 1910s William B
KY James euwing and Ernest Codman had
treated bone sarcomas with a mixture of
bacterial toxins the so-called K's toxin
Ki had observed occasional responses but
the unpredictable responses likely
caused by immune stimulation never fully
captured the attention of oncologists or
surgeons farber's Gauntlet throughout
the centuries the sufferer from this
disease has been the subject of almost
every conceivable form of
experimentation the fields and forests
the Apothecary shop and the temple have
been ransacked for some successful means
of relief from this intractable malady
hardly any animal has escaped making its
contribution in hair or hide tooth or
toenail thymus or thyroid liver or
spleen in the vain search by man for a
means of relief William Banbridge the
search for a way to eradicate this
Scourge is left to incidental dabbling
and coordinated research the Washington
Post
1946 7 Mi Southwest of the Longwood
hospitals in Boston the town of
Dorchester is a typical sprawling New
England suburb a triangle wedged between
the sui industrial settlements to the
west and the gray Green Bays of the
Atlantic to its East in the late 1940s
waves of Jewish and Irish immigrants
ship Builders iron casters Railway
Engineers fishermen and Factory workers
settled in Dorchester occupying rows of
brick and clabbered houses that snake
their way up Blue Hill Avenue Dorchester
reinvented itself as the quintessential
Suburban family town with parks and
playgrounds along the river a golf
course a church and a synagogue on
Sunday afternoons families converged at
Franklin Park to walk through its leafy
Pathways or to watch ostriches polar
bears and tigers at its zoo on August
16th 1947 in a house across from the zoo
the child of a ship worker in the Boston
yards fell mysteriously ill with a
low-grade fever that waxed and waned
over two weeks without pattern followed
by increasing lethargy and palar Robert
Sandler was 2 years old his twin Elliot
was an active cherubic toddler in
perfect health 10 days after his first
fever Robert's condition worsened
significantly his temperature climbed
higher his complexion turned from Rosy
to a spectral milky white he was brought
to Children's Hospital in Boston his
spleen a fist-sized organ that stores
and makes blood usually barely palpable
underneath the rib cage was visibly
enlarged heing down like an overfilled
bag a drop of blood under farber's
microscope revealed the identity of his
illness thousands of immature lymphoid
leukemic blasts were dividing in a
frenzy their chromosomes condensing and
UNC condensing like tiny clenched and
unclenched fists Sandler arrived at
Children's Hospital just a few weeks
after Farber had received his first
package from letterly on September 6th
1947 Farber began to inject Sandler with
Tero aspartic acid or paa the first of
letterly antifolates consent to run a
clinical trial for a drug even a toxic
drug was not typically required parents
were occasionally cursorily informed
about the trial children were almost
never informed or consulted the nberg
code for human experimentation requiring
explicit voluntary consent from patients
was drafted on August 9th
1947 less than a month before the paa
trial it is doubtful that Farber in
Boston had even heard of any such
required consent code PA had little
effect over the next month Sandler
turned increasingly lethargic he
developed a limp the result of leukemia
pressing down on his spinal cord joint
aches appeared and violent migrating
pains then the leukemia burst through
one of the bones in his thigh causing a
fracture and unleashing a blindingly
intense Indescribable Pain by December
the case seemed hopeless the tip of
Sandler's spleen more dense than ever
with leukemia cells dropped down to his
pelvis he was withdrawn listless swollen
and pale on the verge of death on
December 28th however Farber received a
new version of antifolate from subar and
kilty aminopterin a chemical with a
small change from the structure of paa
Farber snatched the drug as soon as it
arrived and began to inject the boy with
it hoping at best for a minor reprieve
in his cancer the response was marked
the white cell count which had been clim
climbing astronomically 10,000 in
September 20,000 in November and nearly
70,000 in December suddenly stopped
rising and hovered at a plateau then
even more remarkably the count actually
started to drop the leukemic blasts
gradually flickering out in the blood
and then all but disappearing by New
Year's Eve the count had dropped to
nearly 1 16th of its peak value
bottoming out at a nearly normal level
the cancer hadn't vanished under the
microscope there were still malignant
white cells but it had temporarily Abed
frozen into a hematologic stalemate in
the Frozen Boston winter on January 13th
1948 Sandler returned to the clinic
walking on his own for the first time in
two months his spleen and liver had
shrunk so dramatically that his clothes
Farber noted had become loose around the
abdomen his bleeding had stopped his
appetite turned ravenous as if he were
trying to catch up on six months of lost
Meals by February Farber noted the
child's alertness nutrition and activity
were equal to his twins for a brief
month or so Robert Sandler and Elliot
Sandler seemed identical again Sandler's
remission unprecedented in the history
of leukemia set off a flurry of activity
for farbor by the early winter of 1948
more children were at his Clinic a
three-year-old boy brought with a sore
throat a 2 and a half-year-old girl with
lumps in her head and neck all
eventually diagnosed with childhood all
deluged with antifolates from yella and
with patients who desperately needed
them Farber recruited additional doctors
to help him a hematologist named Lewis
diamond and a group of assistants James
wolf Robert Mercer and Robert Sylvester
Farber had infuriated the authorities at
Children's hospital with his first
clinical trial with this the second he
pushed them over the edge the hospital
staff voted to take all the Pediatric
interns off the leukemia chemotherapy
unit the atmosphere in the leukemia
Wards it was felt was far too desperate
and experimental and thus not conducive
to medical
education in essence leaving Farber and
his assistants to perform all the
patient care themselves children with
cancer as one surgeon noted were
typically tucked in the farthest
recesses of the hospital Wards they were
on their deathbeds anyway the
pediatricians argued wouldn't it be
kinder and gentler some insisted to just
let them die in peace when one clinician
suggested that farber's novel chemicals
be reserved only as a last resort for
leukemic children Farber recalling his
prior Life as a pathologist shot back by
that time the only chemical that you
will need will be EMB bombing fluid
Farber outfitted a back room of a ward
near the bathrooms into a makeshift
Clinic his small staff was housed in
various and used spaces in the
department of pathology and back rooms
stairwell shafts and empty offices
institutional support was minimal
farber's assistant sharpened their own
bone marrow needles a practice as
Antiquated as a surgeon wetting his
knives on a wheel farber's staff tracked
the disease in patients with meticulous
attention to detail every blood count
every transfusion every fever was to be
recorded if leukemia was going to be
beaten Farber wanted every minute of
that battle recorded for posterity even
if no one else was willing to watch it
happen that winter of
1948 a severe and dismal chill descended
on Boston snowstorms broke out bringing
farber's Clinic to a standstill the
narrow asphalt rode out to Longwood
Avenue was piled with heaps of Muddy
sleep and the basement tunnels poorly
heated even in the fall were now
freezing daily injections of antifolates
became impossible and farber's team
backed down to three times a week in
February when the storms bedded the
daily injections started again meanwhile
news of farber's experience with
childhood leukemia was beginning to
spread and a slow train of children
began to arrive at his clinic and Case
by case an incredible pattern emerged
the antifolates could drive leukemia
cell counts down occasionally even
resulting in their complete
disappearance at least for a while there
were other remissions as dramatic as
Sandlers two boys treated with
aminopterin returned to school another
child a 2 and 1/2-year-old girl started
to play and run about after 7 months of
lying in bed the normaly of blood almost
restored a flickering momentary normaly
to the childhood but there was always
the same catch after a few months of
remission the cancer would inevitably
relapse ultimately flinging aside even
the most potent of yellow's drugs the
cells would return in the bone marrow
then burst out into the blood and even
the most active antifolates would not
keep their growth down Robert Sandler
died in
1948 having responded for a few months
yet the remissions even if temporary
were still genuine remissions and
historic by April 1948 eight there was
just enough data to put together a
preliminary paper for the New England
Journal of Medicine the team had treated
16 patients of the 16 10 had responded
and five children about onethird of the
initial group remained alive four or
even 6 months after their diagnosis in
leukemia 6 months of survival was an
eternity farber's paper published on
June 3rd
1948 was 7 pages long Ed with tables
figures microscope photographs
laboratory values and blood counts its
language was starched formal detached
and scientific yet like all great
medical papers it was a page Turner and
like all good novels it was Timeless to
read it today is to be pitched behind
the scenes into the tumultuous life of
the Boston Clinic its patients hanging
on for life as Farber and his assistant
scrambled to find new drugs for a
dreadful disease that kept flickering
away and returning it was a plot with a
beginning a middle and unfortunately an
end the paper was received as one
scientist recalls with skepticism
disbelief and outrage but for Farber the
study carried a tantalizing message
cancer even in its most aggressive form
had been treated with a medicine a
chemical in 6 months between 1947 and
1948 Farber thus saw a door open briefly
seductively then closed tightly shut
again and through that doorway he
glimpsed an incandesent possibility The
Disappearance of an aggressive systemic
cancer via a chemical drug was virtually
unprecedented in the history of cancer
in the summer of
1948 when one of farber's assistants
performed a bone marrow biopsy on a
leukemic child after treatment with
aminopterin the assistant could not
believe the results the bone marrow
looked so normal he wrote that one could
dream of a cure and so Farber did dream
he dreamed of malignant cells being
killed by specific anti-cancer drugs and
of normal cells regenerating and
reclaiming their physiological spaces of
a whole gamut of such systemic
antagonists to decimate malignant cells
of curing leukemia with chemicals then
applying his experience with chemicals
and Leukemia to more common cancers he
was throwing down a gauntlet for cancer
medicine it was then up to an entire
generation of doctors and scientists to
pick it up private plague we reveal
ourselves in the metaphors we choose for
depicting the cosmos in miniature Steven
J Gould thus for 3,000 years and more
this disease has been known to the
medical profession and for 3,000 years
and more Humanity has been knocking at
the door of the medical profession for a
cure Fortune March
1937 now it is Cancer's turn to be the
disease that doesn't knock before it
enters Susan sag illness as metaphor we
tend to think of cancer as a modern
illness because its metaphors are so
modern it is a disease of overproduction
a fulminant growth growth Unstoppable
growth tipped into the abyss of No
Control Modern Biology encourages us to
imagine the cell as a molecular machine
cancer is that machine unable to quench
its initial command to grow and thus
transformed into an indestructible
self-propelled automaton the notion of
cancer as an Affliction that belongs
paradigmatically to the 20th century is
reminiscent as Susan sag argued so
powerfully in her book illness as
metaphor of another disease once
considered emblematic of another era
tuberculosis in the 19th century both
diseases as sag pointedly noted were
similarly obscene in the original
meaning of that word ill omened
abominable repugnant to the senses both
drain Vitality both stretch out the
encounter with death in both cases dying
even more than death defines the illness
but despite such parallels tuberculosis
belongs to another Century TB or
consumption was Victorian Romanticism
brought to its pathological extreme febr
unrelenting breathless and obsessive it
was a disease of poets John Keats
involuting silently toward death in a
small room overlooking the Spanish Steps
in Rome or Byron an obsessive romantic
who fantasized about dying of the
disease to impress his Mistresses death
and disease are often beautiful alike
The Hectic Glow of consumption thorough
wrote in 1852 in Thomas man's the magic
mount
this Hectic Glow releases a feverish
creative force in its victims a
clarifying edifying cathartic force that
two appears to be charged with the
essence of its era cancer in contrast is
riddled with more contemporary images
the cancer cell is a desperate
individualist in every possible sense a
non-conformist as the surgeon writer
Sherwin nand wrote the word metastasis
used to describe the migration of cancer
from one site to another is a curious
mix of meta and stasis Beyond Stillness
in Latin and unored partially unstable
state that captures The Peculiar
instability of modernity if consumption
once killed its victims by pathological
evisceration the tuberculosis billus
gradually Hollows out the lung then
cancer asphyxiates Us by filling bodies
with too many cells it is consumption in
its alternate meaning the pathology of
excess cancer is an expansionist disease
it it invades through tissues sets up
colonies in hostile Landscapes seeking
sanctuary in one organ and then
immigrating to another it lives
desperately inventively fiercely
territorially cany and defensively at
times as if teaching us how to survive
to confront cancer is to encounter a
parallel species one perhaps more
adapted to survival than even we are
this image of cancer as our desperate
malev
contemporary doppelganger is so haunting
because it is at least partly true a
cancer cell is an astonishing perversion
of the normal cell cancer is a
phenomenally successful Invader and
colonizer in part because it exploits
the very features that make us
successful as a species or as an
organism like the normal cell the cancer
cell relies on growth in the most basic
Elemental sense the division of one cell
to form two in normal tissues this
process is exquisitely regulated such
that growth is stimulated by specific
signals and arrested by other signals in
cancer unbridled growth gives rise to
generation upon generation of cells
biologists use the term clone to
describe cells that share a common
genetic ancestor cancer we now know is a
clonal disease nearly every known cancer
originates from one ancestral cell that
having acquired the capacity of
Limitless cell division and survival
gives rise to Limitless numbers of
descendant fos omnis cellular e cellular
e cellular repeated ad infinum but
cancer is not simply a clonal disease it
is a clonally evolving disease if growth
occurred without Evolution cancer cells
would not be imbued with their potent
capacity to invade survive and
metastasize every generation of cancer
cells creates a small number of cells
that is genetically different from its
parents
when a chemotherapeutic drug or the
immune system attacks cancer mutant
clones that can resist the attack grow
out the fittest cancer cell survives
this mirthless Relentless cycle of
mutation selection and overgrowth
generates cells that are more and more
adapted to survival and growth in some
cases the mutations speed up the
acquisition of other mutations the
genetic instability like a perfect
Madness only provides more impetus to
generate mutant clones cancer thus
exploits the fundamental logic of
evolution unlike any other illness if we
as a species are the ultimate product of
darwinian selection then so to is this
incredible disease that lurks inside us
such metaphorical seductions can carry
us away but they are unavoidable with a
subject like cancer in writing this book
I started off by imagining my project as
a history of cancer but it felt
inescapably as if I were writing not
about something but about someone my
subject daily morphed into something
that resembled an individual and
enigmatic if somewhat deranged image in
a mirror this was not so much a medical
history of an illness but something more
personal more visceral its biography so
to begin again for every biographer must
confront the birth of his subject where
was cancer born how old is cancer who
was the first to record it as an illness
in 1862 Edwin Smith an unusual character
part scholar and part Huer an antique
forger and self made egyptologist bot or
some say stole a 15t long Papyrus from
an antique Sellar in Luxor in Egypt the
Papyrus was in Dreadful condition with
crumbling Yellow Pages filled with
cursive Egyptian script it is now
thought to have been written in the 17th
century BC a transcription of a
manuscript dating back to 2500 BC the
copy array plagiarist in a terrible
hurry had made errors as he had
scribbled often noting Corrections in
red ink in the margins translated in
1930 the Papyrus is now thought to
contain the collected teachings of motep
a great Egyptian physician who lived
around
2,625 BC Mot
among the few non-royal Egyptians known
to us from the Old Kingdom was a
renaissance man at the center of a
sweeping Egyptian renaissance as a viser
in the court of King joser he dabbled in
neurosurgery tried his hand at
architecture and made early foray into
astrology and astronomy even the Greeks
encountering the fierce hot blast of his
intellect as they marched through Egypt
centuries Later cast him as an ancient
magician and fused him to their own
medical God asclepius but the surprising
feature of the Smith Papyrus is not
magic and religion but the absence of
magic and religion in a world immersed
in spells incantations and charms imotep
wrote about broken bones and dislocated
vertebrae with a detached sterile
scientific vocabulary as if he were
writing a modern surgical textbook the
48 cases in the Papyrus fractures of the
hand gaping abscesses of the skin or
shattered skull bones are treated as
medical conditions rather than occult
phenomena each with its own anatomical
glossery diagnosis summary and prognosis
and it is under these clarifying
headlamps of an ancient surgeon that
cancer first emerges as a distinct
disease describing case 45 motep advises
if you examine a case having bulging
masses on the breast and you find that
they have spread over his breast if you
place your hand upon the breast and find
them to be be cool there being no fever
at all therein when your hand feels him
they have no granulations contain no
fluid give rise to no liquid discharge
yet they feel protuberant to your touch
you should say concerning him this is a
case of bulging masses I have to contend
with bulging tumors of the breast mean
the existence of swellings on the breast
large spreading and hard touching them
is like touching a ball of wrappings or
they may be compared to the unripe Hemet
fruit which is hard and cool to the
touch a bulging mass in the breast cool
hard dense as a Hemet fruit and
spreading insidiously Under the Skin
could hardly be a more Vivid description
of breast cancer every case in the
Papyrus was followed by a concise
discussion of treatments even if only
pallative milk poured through the ears
of Neurosurgical patients puses for
wounds bombs for burns but with case 45
imotep fell atypically silent under the
section titled therapy he offered only a
single sentence there is none with that
admission of impotence cancer virtually
disappeared from ancient medical history
other diseases cycled violently through
the globe leaving behind their cryptic
Footprints in Legends and documents a
furious febrile plague typhus perhaps
blazed through the port city of avarest
in 1715 BC decimating its population
small pox erupted volcanically in
Pockets leaving its Telltale pock marks
on the face of Ramsey I in the 12th
century BC tuberculosis Rose and ebbed
through the indis valley like its
seasonal floods but if cancer existed in
the interstices of these massive
epidemics it existed in silence leaving
no easily identifiable Trace in the
medical literature or in any other
literature more than two Millennia p
after otep's description until we once
more hear of cancer and again it is an
illness cloaked in silence a private
shame in his sprawling histories written
around 440 BC the Greek historian
Herodotus records the story of atasa the
queen of Persia who was suddenly struck
by an unusual illness atasa was the
daughter of Cyrus and the wife of Darius
successive ained Emperors of legendary
brutality who ruled over a vast stretch
of land from Lydia on the Mediterranean
Sea to Babylonia on the Persian Gulf in
the middle of her Reign atasa noticed a
bleeding lump in her breast that may
have Arisen from a particularly
malevolent form of breast cancer labeled
inflammatory in inflammatory breast
cancer malignant cells invade the lymph
glands of the breast causing a red
swollen Mass if atasa had desired it an
entire retinue of Physicians from
Babylonia to Greece would have flocked
to her bedside to treat her instead she
descended into a Fierce and impenetrable
loneliness she wrapped herself in sheets
in a self-imposed quarantine Darius
doctors may have tried to treat her but
to no avail ultimately a Greek slave
named demicedes persuaded her to allow
him to excise the tumor soon after that
operation atasa mysteriously vanished
from Herodotus text for him she is
merely a minor plot twist we don't know
whether the tumor recurred or how or
when she died but the procedure was at
least a temporary success atasa lived
and she had demicedes to thank for it
and that reprieve from Pain and illness
whipped her into a frenzy of gratitude
and territorial ambition Darius had been
planning a campaign against cyia on the
eastern border of his Empire goated by
demicedes who wanted to return to his
native Greece atasa pleaded with her
husband to turn his campaign Westward to
invade Greece that turn of the Persian
Empire from east to west and the series
of Greco Persian Wars that followed
would mark one of the definitive moments
in the early history of the West it was
ats's tumor then that quietly launched a
thousand ships cancer even as a
clandestine illness left left its
fingerprints on the ancient world but
Herodotus and motep are storytellers and
like all stories there's have gaps and
inconsistencies the cancers described by
them may have been true
neoplasms or perhaps they were hazily
describing abscesses ulcers warts or
moles the only incontrovertible cases of
cancer in history are those in which the
malignant tissue has somehow been
preserved and to encounter one such
cancer face Toof face to actually stare
the ancient illness in its i1 needs to
journey to a thousand-year-old grave
site in a remote sandswept plane in the
southern tip of Peru the plane lies at
the northern edge of the atakama desert
a parched desolate 600m strip caught in
the leeward shadow of the giant furl of
the Andes that stretches from Southern
Peru into Chile brushed continuously by
a warm desiccating wind the terrain
hasn't seen rain in recorded history it
is hard to imagine that human life once
flourished here but it did the plane is
strewn with hundreds of graves small
shallow pits dug out of the clay then
lined carefully with rock over the
centuries dogs storms and Grave robbers
have dug out these shallow Graves
exhuming history the graves contain the
mummified remains of members of the
chera tribe the chera made no effort to
preserve their de dead but the climate
is almost providentially perfect for
mummification the clay leeches water and
fluids out of the body from below and
the wind dries the tissues from above
the bodies often plac seated are thus
swiftly Frozen in time and space in 1990
one such large desiccated grave site
containing about 140 bodies caught the
attention of Arthur alhy a professor at
the University of Minnesota in duth Al
Hy is a pathologist by training but his
specialty is
paleopathology a study of ancient
specimens his autopsies unlike farers
are not performed on recently living
patients but on the mummified remains
found on archaeological sites he stores
these human specimens in small sterile
milk containers in a vault-like chamber
in Minnesota there are nearly 5,000
pieces of tissue scores of biopsies and
hundreds of broken skeletons in his
closet at the chura site alhy rigged up
a makeshift dissecting table and
performed 140 autopsies over several
weeks one body revealed an extraordinary
finding the mummy was of a young woman
in her mid-30s found sitting with her
feet curled up in a shallow clay grave
when alhy examined her his fingers found
a hard bulbous mass in her left upper
arm the papery folds of skin remarkably
preserved gave way to that mass which
was intact and studded with spicules of
bone this without question was a
malignant bone tumor an
osteosarcoma a thousand-year-old cancer
preserved inside of a mummy alhy
suspects that the tumor had broken
through the skin while she was still
alive even small osteosarcomas can be
unimaginably painful the woman's pain He
suggests must have been blinded ly
intense alhy isn't the only
paleopathologist to have found cancers
in mummified specimens bone tumors
because they form hardened and calcified
tissue are vastly more likely to survive
over centuries and are best preserved
there are other cancers found in mummies
where the malignant tissue has been
preserved the oldest of these is an
abdominal cancer from doley in Egypt
from about 400 ad he said in other cases
paleopathologists have not found the
actual tumors but rather signs left by
the tumors in the body some skeletons
were riddled with tiny holes created by
cancer in the skull or the shoulder
bones all arising from metastic skin or
breast cancer in
1914 a team of archaeologists found a
2,000-year-old Egyptian mummy in the
alexandrian catacombs with a tumor
invading the pelvic bone LS leaky the
archaeologist who dug up Lucy one of the
earliest known human skeletons also
discovered a Jawbone dating from 400 BC
from a nearby site that carried the
signs of a peculiar form of lymphoma
found endemically in Southeastern Africa
although the origin of that tumor was
never confirmed pathologically if that
finding does represent an ancient Mark
of malignancy then cancer far from being
a modern disease is one of the oldest
diseases ever seen in a human specimen
quite possibly the oldest the most
striking finding though is not that
cancer existed in the distant past but
that it was fleetingly rare when I asked
alhy about this he laughed the early
history of cancer he said is that there
is very little early history of cancer
the Mesopotamians knew their migraines
the Egyptians had a word for seizures a
leprosy like illness Sarat is mentioned
in the Book of Leviticus the Hindu betas
have a medical term for dropsy and a
goddess specifically dedicated to
smallpox tuberculosis was so omnipresent
and familiar to the Ancients that as
with ice and the eskimo's distinct words
exist for each incarnation of it but
even common cancers such as breast lung
and prostate are conspicuously absent
with a few notable exceptions in the
vast stretch of medical history there is
no book or God for cancer there are
several reasons behind this absence
cancer is an age- related disease
sometimes exponentially so the risk of
breast cancer for instance is about 1 in
400 for a 30-year-old woman and
increases to 1 in N for a 70-year-old in
most ancient societies people didn't
live long enough to get cancer men and
women were long consumed by tuberculosis
dropsy chalera small poox leprosy plague
or pneumonia if cancer existed
it remains submerged Under the Sea of
other illnesses indeed Cancer's
emergence in the world is the product of
a double negative it becomes common only
when all other Killers themselves have
been killed 19th century doctors often
linked cancer to
civilization cancer they imagined was
caused by the rush and whirl of Modern
Life which somehow incited pathological
growth in the body the link was correct
but the causality was not civilization
did not cause cancer but by extending
human lifespan civilization unveiled it
longevity although certainly the most
important contributor to the prevalence
of cancer in the early 20th century is
probably not the only contributor our
capacity to detect cancer earlier and
earlier and to attribute deaths
accurately to it has also dramatically
increased in the last century the death
of a child with leukemia in the 1850s
would have been attributed to an abscess
or infection ction or as Bennett would
have it to a suppuration of blood and
surgery biopsy and autopsy techniques
have further sharpened our ability to
diagnose cancer the introduction of
mamography to detect breast cancer early
in its course sharply increased its
incidence a seemingly paradoxical result
that makes perfect sense when we realize
that the x-rays allow earlier tumors to
be diagnosed finally changes in the
structure of Modern Life have radically
shifted the Spectrum of cancers
increasing the incidence of some
decreasing the incidence of others
stomach cancer for instance was highly
prevalent in certain populations until
the late 19th century likely the result
of several carcinogens found in pickling
reagents and preservatives and
exacerbated by endemic and contagious
infection with a bacterium that causes
stomach cancer with the introduction of
modern refrigeration and possibly
changes in public hygiene that have
diminished the rate of endemic infection
the stomach cancer epidemic seems to
have abetted in contrast lung cancer
incidents in men increased dramatically
in the 1950s as a result of an increase
in cigarette smoking during the early
20th century in women a cohort that
began to smoke in the
1950s lung cancer incidence has yet to
reach its peak the consequence of these
demographic and epidemiological shifts
was and is enormous in 1900 as Roswell
Park noted tuberculosis was by far the
most common cause of death in America
behind tuberculosis came pneumonia
William Osler the famous physician from
Johns Hopkins University called it
captain of the men of death diarrhea and
gastroenteritis cancer still lagged at a
distant 7th by the early 1940s cancer
had ratcheted its way to second on the
list immediately behind heart disease in
that same span life expectancy among
Americans had increased by about 26
years the proportion of persons above 60
years the age when most cancers begin to
strike nearly doubled but the Rarity of
ancient cancers
notwithstanding it is impossible to
forget the tumor growing in the bone of
alides mummy of a
35-year-old the woman must have wondered
about the insolent gnaw of pain in her
bone and the Bulge slowly emerging from
her arm it is hard to look at the tumor
and not come away with the feeling that
one has encountered a powerful monster
in its infancy onos black bile without
boiling causes cancers Galen
ad we have learned nothing therefore
about the real cause of cancer or its
actual nature we are where the Greeks
were Francis Carter would in
1914 his bad bile his bad habits his Bad
Bosses his bad jeans Mel GRE Reaves
cancer The evolutionary Legacy 2000 in
some ways disease does not exist until
we have agreed that it does by
perceiving naming and responding to it c
e Rosenberg even an ancient monster
needs a name to name an illness is to
describe a certain condition of
suffering a literary act before it
becomes a medical one a patient long
before he becomes the subject of medical
scrutiny is at first simply a
Storyteller a narrator of suffering a
traveler who has visited the kingdom of
the ill to relieve an illness one must
begin then by unburdening its Story the
names of ancient illnesses are condensed
stories in their own right typhus a
stormy disease with erratic vaporous
fevers arose from the Greek tufon the
father of wind word that also gives rise
to the modern typhoon influenza emerged
from the Latin influencia because
medieval doctors imagined that the
cyclical epidemics of flu were
influenced by stars and planets
revolving toward and away from the earth
tuberculosis coagulated out of the Latin
tuber referring to the swollen lumps of
glands that looked like small vegetables
lymphatic tuberculosis TB of the lymph
glands was called scrofula from the
Latin word for piglet evoking the rather
morbid image of a chain of swollen
glands arranged in a line like a group
of suckling pigs it was in the time of
hypocrates around 400 BC that a word for
cancer first appeared in the medical
literature Carinos from the Greek word
for crab the tumor with its clutch of
swollen blood vessels around it reminded
hypocrates of a crab dug in the sand
with its legs spread in a circle the
image was peculiar few cancers truly
resemble crabs but also Vivid later
writer
both doctors and patients added
embellishments for some the hardened
matted surface of the tumor was
reminiscent of the tough carapace of a
crab's body others felt a crab moving
under the flesh as the disease spread
stealthily throughout the body for yet
others the sudden stab of pain produced
by the disease was like being caught in
the grip of a crabb's pincers another
Greek word would intersect with the
history of cancer Enos a word used
occasionally to describe tumors from
which the discipline of oncology would
take its modern name Enos was the Greek
term for a mass or a load or more
commonly a burden cancer was imagined as
a burden carried by the body in Greek
Theater the same word Enos would be used
to denote a tragic mask that was often
burdened with an unwieldy conical weight
on its head to denote the psychic load
carried by its wearer but while these
Viv metaphors might resonate with our
contemporary understanding of cancer
what hypocrates called Carinos and the
disease that we now know as cancer were
in fact vastly different creatures
Hippocrates Carinos were mostly large
superficial tumors that were easily
visible to the eye cancers of the breast
skin jaw neck and tongue even the
distinction between malignant and
non-malignant tumors likely escaped
hypocrates his Carinos included every
conceivable form of swelling nodes
carbuncle polyps protrusions tubercles
pules and glands lumps lumped
indiscriminately into the same category
of pathology the Greeks had no
microscopes they had never imagined an
entity called a cell let alone seen one
and the idea that Carinos was the
uncontrolled growth of cells could not
possibly have occurred to them they were
however preoccupied with fluid mechanics
with water wheels Pistons valves
Chambers and sloes re ution in hydraulic
science originating with irrigation and
Canal digging and culminating with
Archimedes discovering his aonomus laws
in his bathtub this preoccupation with
hydraulics also flowed into Greek
medicine and pathology to explain
illness all illness hypocrates fashioned
an elaborate Doctrine based on fluids
and volumes which he freely applied to
pneumonia oils disent and hemorrhoids
the human body hypocrates proposed was
composed of four cardinal fluids called
humors blood black bile yellow bile and
fleem each of these fluids had a unique
color red black yellow and white
viscosity and essential character in the
normal body these four fluids were held
imperfect if somewhat precarious balance
in illness this balance was upset by the
excess of one fluid The Physician
Claudius galin A prolific writer and
influential Greek doctor who practiced
among the Romans around ad 160 brought
Hippocrates humoral Theory to its apy
like Hippocrates Galen set about
classifying all illnesses in terms of
excesses of various fluids inflammation
a red hot painful distension was
attributed to an overabundance of blood
tubes pules Qatar and nodules of lymph
all cool boggy and white were excesses
of flim John was the Overflow of yellow
bile for cancer Galen reserved the most
malevolent and disquieting of the four
humors black bile only one other disease
replete with metaphors would be
attributed to an excess of this oily
viscous humor depression indeed
Melancholia the medieval name for
depression would draw its name from the
Greek meas black and Cole
depression and cancer the psychic and
physical diseases of black bile were
thus intrinsically intertwined Galen
proposed that cancer was trapped black
biostatic while unable to escape from a
site and thus congealed into a matted
mass of black choler bile without
boiling cometh cancer Thomas Gail the
English surgeon wrote of galen's theory
in the 16th century and if the humor be
sharp it Mock ulceration and for this
cause the tumors are more blacker in
color that short Vivid description would
have a profound impact on the future of
oncology much broader than galin or
gaale may have intended cancer galenic
Theory suggested was the result of a
systemic malignant State an internal
overdose of black bile tumors were just
local outcroppings of a deep-seated
bodily dysfunction an imbalance of
physiology that had pervaded the entire
Corpus Hippocrates had once abst rusly
opined that cancer was best left
untreated since patients live longer
that way 5 centuries later Galen had
explained his teacher gomic musings in a
Fantastical swoop of physiological
conjecture the problem with treating
cancer surgically Galen suggested was
that black bile was everywhere as
inevitable and pervasive as any fluid
you could cut cancer out but the bile
would flow right back like sap seeping
through the limbs of a tree
Galen died in Rome in 199 ad but his
influence on medicine stretched over the
centuries the black bile theory of
cancer was so metaphorically seductive
that it clung on tenaciously in the
minds of doctors the surgical removal of
tumors a local solution to a systemic
problem was thus perceived as a Fool's
operation generations of Surgeons
layered their own observations on galin
solidifying the theory even further do
not be led away and offer to operate
John of ardern wrote in the mid
1300s it will only be a disgrace to you
Leonard bapaga perhaps the most
influential surgeon of the 15th century
added his own
admonishment those who pretend to cure
cancer by inzing lifting and extraa it
only transform an ulcerous cancer into
an ulcerous one in all my practice I
have never seen a cancer cured by
incision nor known anyone who has
unwittingly Galen may actually have done
the future victims of cancer a favor at
least a temporary one in the absence of
anesthesia and antibiotics most surgical
operations performed in the Dank chamber
of a medieval clinic or more typically
in the back room of a barber shop with a
rusty knife and leather straps for
restraints were disastrous
life-threatening Affairs the 16th
century surgeon Ambrose peir described
charring tumors with a soldering iron
heated on coals or chemically searing
them with a paste of sulfuric acid even
a small Nick in the skin treated thus
could quickly suppurate into a lethal
infection the tumors would often
profusely bleed at the slightest
provocation Loren heer an 18th century
German physician once described a
mastectomy in his Clinic as if it were a
sacrificial ritual many females can
stand the operation with the greatest
courage and without hardly moaning at
all others however
make such a clamor that they may
dishearten even the most undaunted
surgeon and hinder the operation to
perform the operation the surgeon should
be steadfast and not allow himself to
become discomfort by the cries of the
patient
unsurprisingly rather than take their
chances with such undaunted surgeons
most patients chose to hang their Fates
with galin and try systemic medicines to
purge the black bile the Apothecary thus
soon filled up with an enormous list of
remedies for cancer tincture of lead
extracts of arsenic or's tooth Fox lungs
rasped Ivory H Castor Ground White Coral
epicac Senna and a smattering of pivs
and laxatives there was alcohol and the
tincture of opium for intractable pain
in the 17th century a paste of crab's
eyes at five Shillings a pound was
popular using fire to treat fire the
ointments and salves grew inre
increasingly Bizarre by the century
goats dung frogs crows feet dog fennel
tortoise liver the laying of hands bless
Waters or the compression of the tumor
with lead plates despite galen's advice
an occasional small tumor was still
surgically excised even Galen had
reportedly performed such surgeries
possibly for cosmetic or pallative
reasons but the idea of surgical removal
of cancer as a Curative treatment was
entertained only in the most extreme
circumstances when medicines and
operations failed doctors resorted to
the only established treatment for
cancer borrowed from galen's teachings
an intricate series of bleeding and
purging rituals to squeeze the humors
out of the body as if it were an
overfilled heavy sponge Vanishing humors
racked carcasses make ill anatomies
jundun in the winter of
1533 a 18-year-old student from Brussels
Andreas velus arrived at the University
of Paris hoping to learn galenic anatomy
and pathology and to start a practice in
surgery to velia's shock and
disappointment the anatomy lessons at
the University were in a Preposterous
state of disarray the school lacked a
specific space for performing
dissections the basement of the hospital
due where Anatomy demonstrations were
held was a theatrically maob space where
instructors hacked their way through
decaying cadavers while dogs nod on
Bones and drippings below aside from the
eight muscles of the abdomen badly
mangled and in the wrong order no one
had ever shown a muscle to me nor any
bone much less the succession of nerves
veins and arteries velus wrote in a
letter without a map of human organs to
guide them surgeons were left to hack
their way through the body like Sailors
sent to sea without a map the blind
leading the
frustrated with these ad hoc dissections
velus decided to create his own
anatomical map he needed his own
specimens and he began to scour the
graveyards around Paris for bones and
bodies at Mont faulcon he stumbled upon
the massive jibit of the City of Paris
where the bodies of petty prisoners were
often left dangling a few miles away at
the cemetery of the Innocents the
skeletons of victims of the Great Plague
lay half exposed in their graves eroded
down to the bone the jibit and the
graveyard the convenience stores for the
medieval anatomist yielded specimen
after specimen for velus and he
compulsively raided them often returning
twice a day to cut pieces dangling from
the chains and smuggle them off to his
dissection chamber Anatomy came alive
for him in this Grizzly World of the
Dead in 1538 collaborating with artists
in tishan studio Theus began to publish
his detailed drawings in plates and
books elaborate and delicate etchings
charting the courses of arteries and
veins mapping nerves and lymph nodes in
some plates he pulled away layers of
tissue exposing the delicate surgical
planes underneath in another drawing he
sliced through the brain in De
horizontal sections a human CT scanner
centuries before it's time to
demonstrate the relationship between the
sists and the ventricles velia's
anatomical project had started as a
purely intellectual exercise but was
soon propelled toward a pragmatic need
galen's humoral theory of disease that
all diseases were pathological
accumulations of the four cardinal
fluids required that patients be bled
and purged to squeeze the culprit humors
out of the body but for the bleedings to
be successful they had to be performed
at specific sites in the body if the
patient was to be bled prophylactically
that is to prevent disease then the
purging was to be performed form Med far
away from the possible disease site so
that the humors could be diverted from
it but if the patient was being bled
therapeutically to cure and establish
disease then the bleeding had to be done
from nearby vessels leading into the
site to clarify this already foggy
Theory galin had borrowed an equally
foggy hypocritic expression cap Alpha
Iota Iota Epsilon Iota Upsilon Greek for
straight into to describe isolating the
vessels that led straight into tumors
but galen's terminology had pitched
Physicians into further confusion what
on Earth they wondered had galin meant
by straight into which vessels LED
straight into a tumor or an organ and
which led the way out the instructions
became a maze of
misunderstanding in the absence of a
systematic anatomical map without the
establishment of normality abnormal
Anatomy was impossible to Fathom the
salus decided to solve the Problem by
systematically sketching out every blood
vessel and nerve in the body producing
an anatomical Atlas for surgeons in the
course of explaining the opinion of the
Divine hypocrates in galin he wrote in a
letter I happen to delineate the veins
on a chart thinking that thus I might be
able easily to demonstrate what
hypocrates understood by the expression
cap Alpha Iota Iota Epsilon Iota Upsilon
for you know how much dissension and
controversy on Venice section was
stirred up even among the learned but
having started this project velus found
that he could not stop my drawing of the
veins pleased the professors of medicine
and all the students so much that they
earnestly sought from me a diagram of
the arteries and also one of the nerves
I could not disappoint them the body was
endlessly
interconnected veins ran parallel to
nerves the nerves were connected to the
spinal cord the cord to the brain and so
forth Anatomy could only be captured in
its totality and soon soon the project
became so gargantuan and complex that it
had to be outsourced to yet other
illustrators to complete but no matter
how diligently velus poured through the
body he could not find galen's black
bile the word autopsy comes from the
Greek to see for oneself as velus
learned to see for himself he could no
longer Force galen's mystical Visions to
fit his own the lymphatic system carried
a pale watery fluid the blood blood
vessels were filled as expected with
blood yellow bile was in the liver but
black bile galin oozing carrier of
cancer and depression could not be found
anywhere Theus now found himself in a
strange position he had emerged from a
tradition steeped in galenic scholarship
he had studied edited and republished
galen's books but black bile that
glistening centerpiece of galen's
physiology was nowhere to be found the
salus hedged about his Discovery
guiltily he heaped even more praise on
the long dead galin but an empiricist to
the core velus left his drawings just as
he saw things leaving others to draw
their own conclusions there was no black
bile velus had started his anatomical
project to save galen's Theory but in
the end he quietly buried it in 1793
Matthew Bailey an anatomist in London
published a textbook called The Morbid
anatomy of some of the most important
parts of the human body Bailey's book
written for surgeons and anatomists was
the obverse of velia's project if velus
had mapped out normal Anatomy Bailey
mapped the body in its diseased abnormal
state it was velia's study read through
an inverted lens galin's Fantastical
speculations about illnesses were even
more at stake here black bile may not
have existed discernably in normal
tissue but tumors should have been
chockful of it but none was to be found
Bailey described cancers of the lung as
large as an orange stomach a fungus
appearance and the testicles a foul deep
ulcer and provided Vivid Engravings of
these tumors but he could not find the
channels of B anywhere not even in his
orange siiz tumors nor in the deepest
cavities of his foul deep ulcers if
galen's web of invisible fluids existed
then it existed outside tumors outside
the pathological World outside the
boundaries of normal anatomical inquiry
in short outside Medical Science like
velius Bailey Drew anatomy and cancer
the way he actually saw it at long last
the Vivid channels of black bile the
humors and the tumors that had so
gripped the minds of doctors and
patients for centuries vanished from the
picture remote sympathy in treating of
cancer we shall remark that little or no
confidence should be placed either in
internal remedies and that there is
nothing except the total separation of
the part affected a dictionary of
practical surgery
1836 Matthew Bailey's morbid Anatomy
laid the intellectual foundation for the
surgical extractions of tumors if black
bile did not exist as Bailey had
discovered then removing cancer
surgically might indeed RIS the body of
the disease but surgery as a discipline
was not yet ready for such operations in
the 1760s a Scottish surgeon John Hunter
Bailey's maternal uncle had started to
remove tumors from his patients in a
clinic in London in quiet Defiance of
galen's teachings but hunter elaborate
studies initially performed on animals
and cadavers in a shadowy managerie in
his own house were stuck at a critical
bottleneck he could nimbly reach down
into the tumors and if they were movable
as he called superficial non-invasive
cancers pull them out without disturbing
the tender architecture of tissues
underneath if a tumor is not only
movable but the part naturally so Hunter
wrote they may be safely removed also
but it requires Great caution to know if
any of these consequent tumors are
within proper reach for we are apt to be
deceived that last sentence was crucial
I'll be be it crudely Hunter had begun
to classify tumors into stages movable
tumors were typically early stage local
cancers immovable tumors were Advanced
invasive and even metastatic Hunter
concluded that only movable cancers were
worth removing surgically for more
advanced forms of cancer he advised an
honest if chilling remedy reminiscent of
him hotep's remote sympathy Hunter was
an Immaculate anatomist but his surgical
mind was far ahead of his hand a
reckless and Restless man with nearly
maniacal energy who slept only 4 hours a
night Hunter had practiced his surgical
skills endlessly on cadavers from every
nook of the Animal Kingdom on monkeys
sharks wall russes pheasants bears and
Ducks but with live Human patience he
found himself at a standstill even if he
worked at Breakneck speed having drugged
his patient with alcohol and opium to
near Oblivion the leap from cool
bloodless corpses to live patients was
fraught with danger as if the pain
during surgery were not bad enough the
threat of infections after surgery
loomed those who survived the terrifying
Crucible of the operating table often
died even more miserable deaths in their
own beds soon afterward in the brief
span between 1846 and
1867 two discoveries Swept Away the
these two quandries that had haunted
surgery thus allowing cancer surgeons to
revisit the Bold procedures that Hunter
had tried to perfect in London the first
of these discoveries anesthesia was
publicly demonstrated in 1846 in a
packed surgical Amphitheater at
Massachusetts General Hospital less than
10 miles from where Sydney farber's
basement laboratory would be located a
century later at about 10:00 on the
morning of October 16th a group of
doctors gathered in a pit-like room at
the center of the hospital a Boston
dentist William Morton unveiled a small
glass vaporizer containing about a quart
of ether fitted with an inhaler he
opened the nozzle and asked the patient
Edward Abbott a printer to take a few
whiffs of the vapor as Abbott led into a
deep sleep a surgeon stepped into the
center of the amphitheater and with a
few brisk Strokes deely made a small
incision in Abbott's neck and closed a
swollen malformed blood vessel referred
to as a tumor conflating malignant and
benign swellings with a Quick Stitch
when Abbot awoke a few minutes later he
said I did not experience pain at any
time though I knew that the operation
was proceeding anesthesia the
dissociation of pain from surgery
allowed surgeons to perform prolonged
operations often lasting several hours
but the hurdle of postsurgical infection
remained and until the mid 19th century
such infections were common and
universally lethal but their cause
remained a mystery it must be some
subtle principle contained in the wound
one surgeon concluded in
1819 which eludes the site in
1865 a Scottish surgeon named Joseph
liser made an unusual conjecture on how
to neutralize that subtle principle
lurking elusively in the wound liser
began with an old clinical observation
wounds left open to the air would
quickly turn gangrenous while closed
wounds would often remain clean and
uninfected in the postsurgical wards of
the Glasgow infirmary liser had again
and again seen an angry red margin begin
to spread out from the wound and then
the skin seemed to rot from inside out
often followed by fever pus and a swift
death a bonified separation lisst
thought of a distant seemingly unrelated
experiment in Paris Louie Pastor the
great French chemist had shown that meat
broth left exposed to the air would soon
turn turbid and begin to ferment while
meat broth sealed in a sterilized vacuum
jar would remain clear based on these
observations pastur had made a bold
claim the turbidity was caused by the
growth of invisible microorganisms
bacteria that had fallen out of the air
into the broth liser took pastur
reasoning further an open wound a
mixture of plotted blood and denuded
flesh was after all a human variant of
pestor meat broth a natural petri dish
for bacterial growth could the bacteria
that had dropped into pastor's cultures
in France also be dropping out of the
air into liser patients wounds in
Scotland liser then made another
inspired leap of logic if postsurgical
infections were being caused by bacteria
then perhaps an antibacterial process or
chemical could curb these infections if
occurred to me he wrote in his clinical
notes that the decomposition in the
injured part might be avoided without
excluding the air by applying as
addressing some material capable of
destroying the life of the floating
particles in the neighboring town of
Carlile liser had observed sewage
disposers cleanse their waste with a
cheap sweet smelling liquid containing
carbolic acid liser began to apply
carbolic acid paste to wounds after
surgery that he was applying in a sewage
cleanser to his patients appears not to
have struck him as even the slightest
bit unusual in August
1867 a 13-year-old boy who had severely
cut his arm while operating a machine at
a fair in Glasgow was admitted to listi
infirmary the boy's wound was open and
smeared with Grime set up for Gang Green
but rather than amputating the arm lisst
tried a salve of carbolic acid hoping to
keep the arm alive and uninfected the
wound teetered on the edge of a
terrifying infection threatening to
become an abscess but liser persisted
intensifying his application of carbolic
acid paste for a few weeks the whole
effort seemed hopeless but then like a
fire running to the end of a rope the
wound began to dry up a month later when
the puses were removed the skin had
completely healed underneath it was not
long before List's invention was joined
to the advancing front of cancer surgery
in 1869 liser removed a breast tumor
from his sister Isabella Pim using a
dining table as his operating table
ether for anesthesia and carbolic acid
as his antiseptic she survived without
an infection although she would
eventually die of liver metastasis 3
years later a few months later liser
performed an extensive amputation on
another patient with cancer likely a
saroma in a thigh by the mid 1870s liser
was routinely operating on breast cancer
and had extended his surgery to the
cancer Afflicted lymph nodes under the
breast antisepsis and anesthesia were
twin technological breakthroughs that
released surgery from its constraining
medieval Chrysalis armed with ether and
carbolic soap a new generation of
Surgeons lunged toward the forbiddingly
complex anatomical procedures that
Hunter and his colleague Lees had once
concocted on cavers an incandescent
Century of cancer surgery emerged
between 1850 to 1950 surgeons brazenly
attacked cancer by cutting open the body
and removing tumors emblematic of this
era was the prolific vienes surgeon
Theodore B Roth born in
1821 B Roth studied music and surgery
with almost equal Verve the professions
still often go hand inand both push
manual skill to its limit both mature
with practice and age both depend on
immediacy precision and opposable thumbs
in 1867 as a professor in Berlin Bill
Roth launched a systematic study of
methods to open the human abdomen to
remove malignant masses until Bill
Roth's time the mortality following
abdominal surgery had been forbidding
Bill Roth's approach to the problem was
meticulous and formal for nearly a
decade he spent surgery after surgery
simply opening and closing abdomen of
animals and human cavers defining clear
and safe routes to the inside by the
early 1880s he had established the
routes the course so far is already
sufficient proof that the operation is
possible he wrote our next care and the
subject of our next studies must be to
determine the indications and to develop
the technique to suit all kinds of cases
I hope we have taken another good step
forward towards securing unfortunate
people hitherto regarded as incurable at
the algamus crankin house the teaching
Hospital in Vienna where he was
appointed a professor Bill Roth and his
students now began to master and use a
variety of techniques to remove tumors
from the stomach colon ovaries and
esophagus hoping to cure the body of
cancer the switch from exploration to
cure produced an unanticipated challenge
a cancer surgeon's task was to remove
malignant tissue while leaving normal
tissue and organs intact but this task
Bill Roth soon discovered demanded a
nearly Godlike creative Spirit since the
time of velus surgery had been immersed
in the study of natural Anatomy but
cancer so often disobeyed and distorted
natural anatomical boundaries that
unnatural boundaries had to be invented
to constrain it to remove the distal end
of a stomach filled with cancer for
instance Bill Roth had to hook up the
pouch remaining after surgery to a
nearby piece of the small intestine to
remove the entire bottom half of the
stomach he had to attach the remainder
to a piece of distant junam by the mid
1890s Bill Roth had operated on 41
patients with gastric carcinoma using
these novel anatomical
reconfigurations 19 of these patients
had survived the surgery these
procedures represented pivotal advances
in the treatment of cancer by the early
20th Cent Century many locally
restricted cancers I.E primary tumors
without metastatic lesions could be
removed by surgery these included
uterine and ovarian cancer breast and
prostate cancer colon cancer and lung
cancer if these tumors were removed
before they had invaded other organs
these operations produced cures in a
significant fraction of patients but
despite these remarkable advances some
cancers even seemingly locally
restricted did one still relapsed after
surgery prompting second and often third
attempts to resect tumors surgeons
returned to the operating table and cut
and cut again as if caught in a cat and
mouse game as cancer was slowly
excavated out of the human body piece by
piece but what if the whole of cancer
could be uprooted at its earliest stage
using the most definitive surgery
conceivable what if cancer incurable by
means of conventional local surgery
could be cured Ed by a radical
aggressive operation that would dig out
its roots so completely so exhaustively
that no possible Trace was left behind
in an era captivated by the potency and
creativity of Surgeons the idea of a
surgeon's knife extracting cancer by its
roots was imbued with promise and wonder
it would land on the already brittle and
combustible world of oncology like a
firecracker thrown into gunpowder Hunter
used this term both to describe CRI
metastatic remotely disseminated cancer
and to argue that therapy was useless a
radical idea the professor who blesses
the occasion which permits him to
explain something profound nears me and
is pleased to direct me amputate the
breast pardon me I said with sadness but
I had forgotten the operation Rolo
Figueroa in poet Physicians it is over
she is dressed steps gently and decently
down from the table looks for James then
turning to the surgeon and the students
she curtsies and in a low clear voice
begs their pardon if she has behaved ill
the students all of us wept like
children the surgeon haed her up John
Brown describing a 19th century
mastectomy William Stewart hallad whose
name was to be inseparably attached to
the concept of radical surgery did not
ask for that distinction instead it was
handed to him almost without any asking
like a scalpel delivered wordlessly into
the outstretched hand of a surgeon
holstead didn't invent radical surgery
he inherited the idea from his
predecessors and brought it to its
extreme and logical Perfection only to
find it inextricably attached to his
name Hallstead was born in
1852 the son of a well-to-do clothing
Merchant in New York York he finished
high school at the Philips Academy in
Andover and attended Yale College where
his athletic prowess rather than
academic achievement drew the attention
of his teachers and mentors he wandered
into the world of surgery almost by
accident attending medical school not
because he was driven to become a
surgeon but because he could not imagine
himself apprenticed as a merchant in his
father's business in
1874 Hallstead matriculated at the
College of Physicians and surgeons at
Colombia he was immediately fascinated
by Anatomy this Fascination like many of
holsteads other interests in his later
years purebred dogs horses starch
tablecloths linen shirts Parisian
leather shoes and Immaculate surgical
sutur soon grew into an obsessive Quest
he swallowed textbooks of anatomy whole
and when the books were exhausted moved
on to real patience with an equally
insatiable hunger in the mid 1970s
holstead passed an entrance examination
to be a surgical intern at Bellevue a
New York City Hospital swarming with
surgical patients he split his time
between the medical school and the
Surgical Clinic traveling several miles
across New York between Bellevue and
Colombia understandably by the time he
had finished medical school he had
already suffered a nervous breakdown he
recuperated for a few weeks on Block
Island then dusting himself off resumed
his studies with just as much energy and
Verve this pattern heroic Olympian
exertion to the brink of physical
impossibility often followed by a near
collapse was to become a Hallmark of
halstead's approach to nearly every
challenge it would leave an equally
distinct mark on his approach to surgery
surgical education and cancer holstead
entered surgery at a transitional moment
in its history bloodletting cupping
leeching and purging were common
procedures one woman with convulsions
and fever from a post-surgical infection
was treated with even more barbaric
attempts at surgery I opened a large
orifice in each arm her surgeon wrote
with self- congratulatory enthusiasm in
the
1850s and cut both temporal arteries and
had her blood flowing freely from all at
the same time determined to bleed her
until the convulsion ceased another
doctor prescribing a remedy for lung
cancer wrote small bleedings give
temporary relief although of course they
cannot often be repeated at Bellevue the
interns ran about in corridors with pus
pales the bodily drippings of patients
spilling out of them surgical sutures
were made of catgut sharpened with spit
and left to hang from incisions into the
open air surgeons walked around with
their scal pels dangling from their
pockets if a tool fell on the blood
soiled floor it it was dusted off and
inserted back into the pocket or into
the body of the patient on the operating
table in October
1877 leaving behind this gruesome
medical world of purgers bleeders pus
pales and quacks holstead traveled to
Europe to visit the Clinics of London
Paris Berlin Vienna or leig where Young
American surgeons were typically sent to
learn refined European surgical
techniques the timing was fortuitous
holstead arrived in Europe when cancer
surgery was just emerging from its
chrysalis in the high Baroque surgical
amphitheaters of the algamus crankin
house in Vienna Theodore Bill Roth was
teaching his students novel techniques
to dissect the stomach the complete
surgical removal of cancer Bill Roth
told his students was merely an
audacious step away at hiy a few hundred
miles from Vienna the German surgeon
Richard Von vman was working on a
technique to operate on breast cancer
holstead met the Giants of European
surgery Hans Kari who had meticulously
deconstructed the anatomy of the liver
Anton wolfler who had studied with Bill
Roth and was learning to dissect the
thyroid gland for Hallstead this
Whirlwind tour through Berlin hiy Zurich
London and Vienna was an intellectual
baptism when he returned to practice in
New York in the early 1880s his mind was
spinning with the ideas he had
encountered in his journey List's
carbolic sprays vman's early attempts at
cancer surgery and B roths miraculous
abdominal operations energized and
inspired holstead threw himself to work
operating on patients at Roosevelt
Hospital at the College of Physicians
and surgeons at Columbia at Bellevue and
at Chambers Hospital bold inventive and
daring his confidence in his handiwork
boomed in 1882 he removed an infected
gallbladder from his mother on a kitchen
table successfully performing one of the
first such operations in America called
urgently to see his sister who was
bleeding heavily after childbirth he
withdrew his own blood and transfused
her with it he had no knowledge of blood
types but fortunately Hallstead and his
sister were a perfect match in 1884 at
the prime of his career in New York
holstead read a paper describing the use
of a new surgical anesthetic called
cocaine at hi in vman's clinic had
watched German surgeons perform
operations using this drug it was cheap
accessible foolproof and easy to dose
the fast food of surgical
anesthesia his experimental curiosity
aroused Hallstead began to inject
himself with the drug testing it before
using it to numb patients for his
ambitious surgeries he found that It
produced much more than a transitory
numbness it Amplified his Instinct for
tirelessness it synergized with his
already manic energy his mind became as
one Observer put it clearer and clearer
with no sense of fatigue and no desire
or ability to sleep he had it would seem
conquered all his mortal
imperfections the need to sleep
exhaustion and nihilism his rest of
Personality had met its perfect
pharmacological match for the next 5
years holstead sustained an incredible
career as a young surgeon in New York
despite a Fierce and growing addiction
to cocaine he rested some control over
his addiction by heroic self-denial and
discipline at night he reportedly left a
sealed vial of cocaine by his bedside
thus testing himself by constantly
having the drug within Arms Reach but he
relapsed often and fiercely unable to
ever fully overcome his habit he
voluntarily entered the butler
sanatorium in Providence where he was
treated with morphine to treat his
cocaine Habit in essence exchanging one
addiction for another in 1889 still
oscillating between the two highly
addictive drugs yet still astonishingly
productive in his Surgical Clinic in New
York he was recruited to the newly built
Johns Hopkins Hospital by the renowned
physician William welchin part to start
a new surgical department and an equal
part to rest him out of his New York
world of isolation overwork and drug
addiction Hopkins was meant to change
Hallstead and it did gregarius and an
outgoing in his former life he withdrew
sharply into a cocooned and private
Empire where things were controlled
clean and perfect he launched an awe
inspiring Training Program for Young
surgical residents that would build them
in his own image superhuman initiation
into a superhuman profession that
emphasized heroism self-denial diligence
and tirelessness it will be objected
that this apprenticeship is too long
that the young surgeon will be stale he
wrote in 1904 but these positions are
not for those who so soon weary of the
study of their profession he married
Caroline Hampton formerly his chief
nurse and lived in a sprawling
three-story mansion on the top of a hill
cold as Stone and most unlivable as one
of his students described it each
residing on a separate floor childless
socially awkward formal and notoriously
reclusive the Hallstead raised
thoroughbred horses and purebred dxun
Hallstead was still deeply addicted to
Morphine but he took the drug in such
controlled Doses and on such a strict
schedule that not even his closest
students suspected it the couple
diligently avoided Baltimore society
when visitors came unannounced to their
mansion on the hill the maid was told to
inform them that the holsteads were not
home with the world around him erased
and silenced by this routine and Rhythm
Hallstead now attacked breast cancer
with Relentless energy at vman's clinic
in hiy Hallstead had witnessed the
German surgeon performing increasingly
meticulous and aggressive surgeries to
remove tumors from the breast but vman
holstead knew had run into a wall even
though the surgeries had grown extensive
and exhaustive breast cancer had still
relapsed eventually recurring months or
even years after the operation what
caused this relapse at St Luke's
Hospital in London in the 1860s the
English surgeon Charles Moore had also
noted these vexing local recurrences
frustrated by repeated failures Moore
had begun to record the anatomy of each
relapse denoting the area of the
original tumor the precise margin of the
surgery and the sight of cancer
recurrence by drawing tiny black dots on
a diagram of a breast creating a sort of
historical dartboard of cancer
recurrence and to more surprise dot by
dot a pattern had emerged the recurr es
had accumulated precisely around the
margins of the original surgery as if
minute remnants of cancer had been left
behind by incomplete surgery and grown
back mamory cancer requires the careful
extrap of the entire organ more
concluded local recurrence of cancer
after operations is due to the
continuous growth of fragments of the
principal tumor Moore's hypothesis had
an obvious corollary if breast cancer
relapsed due to the inadequacy of the
original surgical excisions then even
more breast tissue should be removed
during the initial operation since the
margins of extrap were the problem then
why not extend the margins more argued
that surgeons attempting to spare women
the disfiguring and often
life-threatening surgery were exercising
mistaken kindness letting cancer get the
better of their knives in Germany
holstead had seen vman remove not just
the breast
but a thin fan-like muscle spread out
immediately under the breast called the
pectoralis minor in the hopes of
cleaning out the minor fragments of
leftover cancer Hallstead took this line
of reasoning to its next inevitable step
vman may have run into a wall Hallstead
would excavate his way past it instead
of stripping away the thin pectoralis
Miner which had little function holstead
decided to dig even deeper into the
breast cavity cutting through the
pectoralis major the large prominent
muscle responsible for moving the
shoulder and the Hand Hallstead was not
alone in this Innovation Willie Meyer a
surgeon operating in New York
independently arrived at the same
operation in the 1890s holstead called
this procedure the radical mastectomy
using the word radical in the Original
Latin sense to mean root he was
uprooting cancer from its very Source
but Hallstead evidently scornful of
mistaken kindness did not stop his
surgery at the pectoralis major when
cancer still recurred despite his
radical mastectomy he began to cut even
farther into the chest by 1898
halstead's mastectomy had taken what he
called an even more radical turn now he
began to slice through the collar bone
reaching for a small cluster of lymph
nodes that lay just underneath it we
clean out or strip the super icular FASA
with very few exceptions he announced at
a surgical conference reinforcing the
notion that conservative non-radical
surgery left the breast somehow unclean
at Hopkins holsteads diligent students
now raced to outpace their Master with
their own scalpels Joseph Bloodgood one
of halstead's first surgical residents
had started to cut farther into the neck
to evacuate a chain of glands that lay
above the collar bone Harvey Cushing
another star Apprentice even cleaned out
the anterior
mediastinum the Deep lymph nodes buried
inside the chest it is likely holstead
noted that we shall in the near future
remove the mediastinal contents at some
of our primary operations a maab
marathon was in progress Hallstead and
his disciples would rather Evacuate the
entire contents of the body than be
faced with cancer recurrences in Europe
one surgeon evacuated three ribs and
other parts of the rib cage and
amputated a shoulder and a collar bone
from a woman with breast cancer
Hallstead acknowledged the physical
penalty of his operation the mammoth
mastectomies permanently disfigured the
bodies of his patients with the
pectoralis major cut off the shoulders
caved inward as if in a Perpetual shrug
making it impossible to move the arm
forward or sideways removing the lymph
nodes under the armpit often disrupted
the flow of lymph causing the arm to
swell up with accumulated fluid like an
elephant's leg a condition he vividly
called surgical
elephantiasis recuperation from surgery
often took patients months even Years
yet Hallstead accepted all these
consequences as if they were the
inevitable War wounds in an allout
battle the patient was a young lady whom
I was loath to
disfigure he wrote with genuine concern
describing an operation extending all
the way into the neck that he had
performed in the 1890s something tender
almost paternal appears in his surgical
notes with outcomes scribbled alongside
personal reminiscences good use of arm
chops wood with it no swelling he wrote
at the end of one case married for
children he scribbled in the margins of
another but did the Hallstead mastectomy
save lives did radical surgery Cure
breast cancer did the young woman that
he was so loath to disfigure benefit
from the surgery that had disfigured her
before answering those questions it's
worthwhile understanding the milu in
which the radical mastectomy flourished
in the 1870s when holstead had left for
Europe to learn from the great masters
of the art surgery was a discipline
emerging from its adolescence by 1898 it
had transformed into a profession
booming with confidence a discipline so
swooning self-impressed with its
technical abilities that great surgeons
unabashedly imagined themselves as
showman the operating room was called an
operating theater and surgery was an
elaborate performance often watched by a
tense hushed audience of observers from
an Oculus above the theater to watch
Hallstead operate one Observer wrote in
1898 was to watch the performance of an
artist close akin to the patient and
minute labor of a Venetian or Florentine
intalio cutter or a master worker in
Mosaic holstead welcomed the technical
challenges of his operation often
conflating the most difficult cases with
the most curable I find myself inclined
to welcome largess of a tumor he wrote
challenging cancer to duel with his
knife but the immediate technical
success of surgery was not a predictor
of its long-term success its ability to
decrease the relapse of cancer
halstead's mastectomy may have been a
Florentine Mosaic workers operation but
if cancer was a chronic relapsing
disease then perhaps cutting it away
even with Hallstead in talio Precision
was not enough to determine whether
Hallstead had truly cured breast cancer
one needed to track not immediate
survival or even survival over 5 or 10
months but survival over 5 or 10 years
the procedure had to be put to a test by
following patients longitudinally in
time so in the mid 189 90 s at the peak
of his surgical career holstead began to
collect long-term statistics to show
that his operation was the superior
Choice by then the radical mastectomy
was more than a decade old Hallstead had
operated on enough women and extracted
enough tumors to create what he called
an entire cancer Storehouse at Hopkins
Hallstead would almost certainly have
been right in his theory of radical
surgery that attacking even small
cancers with aggressive local surgery
was the best way to achieve a cure but
there was a deep conceptual error
imagine a population in which breast
cancer occurs at a fixed incidents say
1% per year the tumors however
demonstrate a spectrum of behavior right
from their Inception in some women by
the time the disease has been diagnosed
the tumor has already spread beyond the
breast there is metastatic cancer in the
bones lungs and liver in other women the
cancer is confined to the breast or to
the breast and a few nodes it is truly a
local disease position Hallstead now
with his scalpel and sutures in the
middle of this population ready to
perform his radical mastectomy on any
woman with breast cancer halstead's
ability to cure patients with breast
cancer obviously depends on the sort of
cancer the stage of breast cancer that
he confronts the woman with the
metastatic cancer is not going to be
cured by a radical mastectomy no matter
how aggressively and meticulously
Halstead extrap hates the tumor in her
breast her cancer is no longer a local
problem in contrast the woman with the
small confined cancer does benefit from
the operation but for her a far less
aggressive procedure a local mastectomy
would have done just as well holsteads
mastectomy is thus A peculiar Misfit in
both cases it underestimates its Target
in the first case and overestimates it
in the second in both cases women are
forced to undergo indiscriminate
disfiguring and morbid operations too
much too early for the woman with local
breast cancer and too little too late
for the woman with metastatic cancer on
April 19th 1898 Hallstead attended the
annual conference of the American
surgical Association in New Orleans on
the second day before a hushed and eager
audience of Surgeons he rose to the
podium armed with figures and tables
showcasing his highly anticipated data
at first glance
his observations were
astounding his mastectomy had
outperformed every other surgeon's
operation in terms of local recurrence
at Baltimore Hallstead had slashed the
rate of local recurrence to a bare few
percent a drastic improvement on vman's
or Bill Roth's numbers just as holstead
had promised he had seemingly
exterminated cancer at its root but if
one looked closely The Roots had
persisted the evidence for a true cure
of breast cancer was much more
disappointing of the 76 patients with
breast cancer treated with the radical
method only 40 had survived for more
than 3 years 36 or nearly half the
original number had died within 3 years
of the surgery consumed by a disease
supposedly uprooted from the body but
Hallstead and his students remained
unfazed rather than address the real
question raised by the data did radical
myectomy truly extend lives they clutch
to their theories even more adamantly a
surgeon should operate on the neck in
every case Hallstead emphasized in New
Orleans where others might have seen
reason for caution Hallstead only saw
opportunity I fail to see why the neck
involvement in itself is more serious
than the axillary area the neck can be
cleaned out as thoroughly as the ailla
in the summer of 1907 Hallstead
presented more data to the American
surgical Association in Washington DC he
divided his patients into three groups
based on whether the cancer had spread
before surgery to lymph nodes in the
ailla or the neck when he put up his
survival tables a pattern became
apparent of the 60 patients with no
cancer Afflicted nodes in the ailla or
the neck the substantial number of 45
had been cured of breast cancer at 5
years of the 40 patients with such nodes
only three had survived
the ultimate survival from breast cancer
in short had little to do with how
extensively a surgeon operated on the
breast it depended on how extensively
the cancer had spread before surgery as
George cryle one of the most fervent
critics of radical surgery later put it
if the disease was so Advanced that one
had to get rid of the muscles in order
to get rid of the tumor then it had
already spread through the system making
the whole operation moot but if holstead
came to the brink of this realization in
19 1907 he just as emphatically shied
away from it he relapsed to stale
aphorisms but even without the proof
which we offer it is I think incumbent
upon the surgeon to perform in many
cases the super clavicular operation he
advised in one paper by now the
perpetually changing landscape of breast
cancer was beginning to Tire him out
trials tables and charts had never been
his
Forte he was a surgeon not a bookkeeper
it is especially true of mammory cancer
he wrote that the surgeon interested in
Furnishing the best statistics May in
perfectly honorable ways provide them
that statement almost vulgar by
halstead's standards exemplified his
growing skepticism about putting his own
operation to a test he instinctively
knew that he had come to the far edge of
his understanding of this amorphous
illness that was constantly slipping out
of his reach the 1907 paper was to be
halstead's last and most comprehensive
discussion on breast cancer he wanted
new and open anatomical Vistas where he
could practice his technically brilliant
procedures in peace not debates about
the measurement and remeasurement of end
points of surgery never having commanded
a particularly good bedside manner he
retreated fully into his cloistered
operating room and into the vast cold
library of his mansion He had already
moved on to other organs the thorax the
th thyroid the great arteries where he
continued to make brilliant surgical
Innovations but he never wrote another
scholarly analysis of the Majestic and
flawed operation that bore his name
between 1891 and 1907 in the 16 hectic
years that stretched from the tenuous
debut of the radical mastectomy in
Baltimore to its centerstage appearances
at vast surgical conferences around the
nation the Quest for a cure for cancer
took a Great Leap Forward and an equally
great step back
holstead proved Beyond any doubt that
massive meticulous surgeries were
technically possible in breast cancer
these operations could drastically
reduce the risk for the local recurrence
of a deadly disease but what Hallstead
could not prove despite his most
strenuous efforts was far more revealing
after nearly two decades of data
Gathering having been levitated praised
analyzed and reanalyzed in conference
after conference the superiority of
radical surgery in curing cancer still
stood on Shaky Ground more surgery had
just not translated into more effective
therapy yet all this uncertainty did
little to stop other surgeons from
operating just as aggressively
radicalism became a psychological
Obsession burrowing its way deeply into
cancer surgery even the word radical was
a seductive conceptual trap holstead had
used it in the Latin sense of root
because his operation was meant to dig
out the buried Subterranean roots of
cancer but radical also meant aggressive
Innovative and Brazen and it was this
meaning that left its mark on the
imaginations of patience what man or
woman confronting cancer would willingly
choose non-radical or conservative
surgery indeed radicalism became Central
not only to how surgeons saw cancer but
also in how they imagined themselves
with no protest from any other quarter
and nothing to stand in its way the
practice of radical surgery one
historian wrote soon fossilized into
Dogma when heroic surgery failed to
match its expectations some surgeons
began to shrug off the responsibility of
a cure altogether undoubtedly if
operated upon properly the condition may
be cured locally and that is the only
point for which the surgeon must hold
himself responsible one of halstead's
discip announced at a conference in
Baltimore in 1931 the best a surgeon
could do in other words was to deliver
the most technically perfect operation
curing cancer was someone else's problem
this trajectory toward more and more
brazenly aggressive operations the more
radical the better mirrored the overall
path of surgical thinking of the early
1930s in Chicago the surgeon Alexander
brunswig devised an operation for
cervical cancer
called a complete pelvic exenteration so
strenuous and exhaustive that even the
most hedian surgeon needed to break mid
procedure to rest and change positions
the New York surgeon George pack was
nicknamed pack the knife after the
Popular Song Mack the Knife as if the
surgeon and his favorite instrument had
like some sort of ghoulish centur
somehow fused into the same creature
cure was a possibility now flung far
into the future even in its widest sense
an English surgeon wrote in
1929 the measure of operability depends
on the question is the lesion removable
and not on the question is the removal
of the lesion going to cure the patient
surgeons often counted themselves lucky
if their patients merely survive these
operations there is an old Arabian
proverb a group of Surgeons wrote at the
end of a particularly chilling
discussion of stomach cancer in
1933 that he is no physician who has not
slain many patients and the surgeon who
operates for carcinoma of the stomach
must remember that often to arrive at
that sort of logic the Hippocratic Oath
turned upside down demands either a
terminal desperation or a terminal
optimism in the 1930s the pendulum of
cancer surgery swung desperately between
those two points Hallstead brunch wig
and pack persisted with their Mammoth
operations because they genuinely
believed that they could relieve the
dreaded symptoms of cancer but they
lacked formal proof and as they went
further up the isolated promontories of
their own beliefs proof became
irrelevant and trials impossible to run
the more fervently surgeons believed in
the inherent good of their operations
the more untenable it became to put
these to a formal scientific trial
radical surgery thus drew the blinds of
circular logic around itself for nearly
a century the Allure and glamour of
radical surgery overshadowed crucial
developments in less radical surgical
procedures for cancer that were evolving
in its penumbra Hallstead students
fanned out to invent new procedures to
extrap cancers each was assigned an
organ halstead's confidence in his
heroic surgical training program was so
Supreme that he imagined his students
capable of confronting and annihilating
cancer in any organ system in 1897
having intercepted a young surgical
resident Hugh Hampton young in a
corridor at Hopkins holstead asked him
to become the head of the new Department
of urological surgery young protested
that he knew nothing about Urological
surgery I know you didn't know anything
holstead replied curtly but we believe
that you can learn and walked on
inspired by halstead's confidence young
delved into surgery for Urological
cancer cancers of the prostate kidney
and bladder in 1904 with holstead as his
assistant young successfully devised an
operation for prostate cancer by
excising the entire gland although
called The Radical prostatectomy in the
tradition of Hallstead Hampton surgery
was rather conservative by comparison he
did not remove muscles lymph nodes or
bone he retained the notion of the
endblock removal of the organ from
radical surgery but stopped short of
evacuating the entire pelvis or extraa
the urethra or the bladder a
modification of this procedure is still
used to remove localized prostate cancer
and it cures a substantial portion of
patients with such tumors Harvey Cushing
Hallstead student and chief surgical
resident concentrated on the brain by
the early 1900s Cushing had found
ingenious ways to surgically extract
brain tumors including the notorious
glioblastomas tumors so heavily
crisscrossed with blood vessels that
they could Hemorrhage any minute and
meningiomas wrapped like sheaths around
delicate and vital structures in the
brain like young Cushing inherited
hassel's intalo surgical technique the
slow separation of brain from tumor
working now here now there leaving small
flattened pads of hot rung out cotton to
control oozing but not holsteads
penchant for radical surgery indeed
Cushing found radical operations on
brain tumors not just difficult but
inconceivable even if he desired it a
surgeon could not exate the entire organ
in 1933 at the Barnes Hospital in St
Louis yet another surgical innovator
Evers Graham pioneered an operation to
remove a lung Afflicted with cancer by
piecing together prior operations that
had been used to remove tubercular lungs
Graham 2 retained the essential Spirit
of hedian surgery the meticulous
excision of the organ n block and The
Cutting of wide margins around the tumor
to prevent local recurrences but he
tried to sidestep its pitfalls resisting
the temptation to excise more and more
tissue lymph nodes throughout the thorax
major blood vessels or the adjacent
fascia around the trachea and esophagus
he removed just the lung keeping the
specimen as intact as possible even so
obsessed with hedian Theory and unable
to see beyond its realm surgeons sharply
berated such attempts at non-radical
surgery a surgical procedure that did
not attempt to obliterate cancer from
the body was poo pooed as a makeshift
operation to indulge in such makeshift
operations was to succumb to the old
flaw of mistaken kindness that a
generation of Surgeons had tried so
diligently to banish the hard tube and
the weak light we have found in x-rays a
cure for the malady Los Angeles Times
April 6th
1902 by way of illustration of the
destructive power of x-rays let us
recall that nearly all Pioneers in the
medical x-ray Laboratories in the United
States died of cancers induced by the
burns the Washington Post
1945 in late October 1895 a few months
after Hallstead had unveiled the radical
mastectomy in Baltimore Wilhelm rkin a
lecturer at The wburg Institute in
Germany was working with an electron
tubay vacuum tube that shot electrons
from one electrode to another when he
noticed a strange leakage the radiant
energy was powerful and invis visible
capable of penetrating layers of
blackened cardboard and producing a
white phosphorescent glow on a barium
screen accidentally left on a bench in
the room rkin whisked his wife Anna into
the lab and placed her hand between the
source of his rays and a photographic
plate the Rays penetrated through her
hand and left a silhouette of her finger
bones and her metallic wedding ring on
the photographic plate the inner anatomy
of a hand seene as if through a magical
lens I have seen my death Anna said but
her husband saw something else a form of
energy so powerful that it could pass
through most living tissues rkin called
his form of light X-rays at first X-rays
were thought to be an artificial cork of
energy produced by electron tubes but in
1896 just a few months after rin's
discovery H re beell the French chemist
who knew of rin's work discovered that
certain natural materials UR among them
autonomously emitted their own invisible
Rays with properties similar to those of
x-rays in Paris friends of beckel's a
young physicist chemist couple named
Pierre and Marie curri began to scour
the natural world for even more powerful
chemical sources of x-rays Pierre and
Marie then Maria
scoda a penniless Polish immigrant
living in a Garrett in Paris had met at
the sorbon and been drawn to each other
because of a common interest in
magnetism in the mid 1880s Pierre cury
had used minuscule quartz crystals to
craft an instrument called an
electrometer capable of measuring
exquisitely small doses of energy using
this device Marie had shown that even
tiny amounts of radiation emitted by
uranium ores could be Quantified with
their new measuring instrument for
radioactivity Marie and Pierre began
hunting for new sources of x-rays
another Monumental Journey of scientific
discovery was thus launched with
measurement in a waste or called pitch
blend a black sludge that came from the
py forests of joim in what is now the
Czech Republic the curies found the
First Signal of a new element in element
many times more radioactive than uranium
the curies set about distilling the
boggy sludge to trap that potent
radioactive Source in its purest form
from several tons of pitch blend for 100
tons of washing water and hundreds of
buckets of distilled sludge waste they
finally fished out 1/10th of a gram of
the new element in 1902 the metal lay on
the far edge of the periodic table
emitting x-rays with such feverish
intensity that it glowered with a
hypnotic blue light in the dark
consuming itself unstable it was a
strange Chimera between matter and
energy matter decomposing into energy
Marie curri called the new element
radium from the Greek word for light
radium by virtue of its potency revealed
a new and unexpected property of x-rays
they could not only carry radiant energy
through human tissues but also deposit
energy deep inside tissues rkin had been
able to photograph his wife's hand
because of the first property his x-rays
had traversed through flesh and Bone and
left a shadow of the tissue on the film
Marie C's hands in contrast bore the
painful Legacy of the second effect
having distilled pitch blend into a
millionth part for week after week in
the hunt for purer and purer
radioactivity the skin in her Palm had
begun to chafe and peel off in blacken
layers as if the tissue had been burnt
from the inside a few milligrams of
radium left in a vial in Pierre's pocket
scorched through the heavy Tweed of his
waist coat and left a permanent scar on
his chest one man who gave magical
demonstrations at a public fair with a
leaky unshielded radium machine
developed swollen and blistered lips and
his cheeks and nails fell out radiation
would eventually burn into Marie C's
bone marrow leaving her permanently
anemic it would take biologists decades
to fully decipher the mechanism that lay
Behind These effects but the spectrum of
damaged tissue skin lips blood gums and
Nails already provided an important clue
radium was attacking DNA DNA is an inert
molecule exquisitely resist to most
chemical reactions for its job is to
maintain the stability of genetic
information but x-rays can shatter
strands of DNA or generate toxic
chemicals that corrode DNA cells respond
to this damage by dying or more often by
ceasing to divide x-rays thus
preferentially kill the most rapidly
proliferating cells in the body cells in
the skin nails gums and blood this
ability of x-rays to selectively kill
rapidly dividing cells did not go
unnoticed especially by cancer
researchers in 1896 barely a year after
rookin had discovered his x-rays a
21-year-old Chicago medical student Emil
grub had the inspired notion of using
x-rays to treat cancer flamboyant
adventurous and fiercely inventive grub
had worked in a factory in Chicago that
produced vacuum x-ray tubes and he had
built a crude version of a tube for his
own experiments having encountered x-ray
exposed Factory workers with peeling
skin and Nails his own hands had also
become chapped and swollen from repeated
exposures grub quickly extended the
logic of this cell death to tumors on
March 29th 1896 in a tube Factory on
Hallstead Street the name Bears no
connection to holstead the surgeon in
Chicago grub began to bombard Rose Lee
an elderly woman with breast cancer with
radiation using an improvised x-ray tube
Lee's cancer had relapsed after a
mastectomy
and the tumor had exploded into a
painful mass in her breast she had been
referred to Grub as a last Stitch
measure more to satisfy his experimental
curiosity than to provide any clinical
benefit grub looked through the factory
for something to cover the rest of the
breast and finding no sheet of metal
wrapped Lee's chest in some tin foil
that he found in the bottom of a Chinese
tea box he irradiated her cancer every
night for 18 consecutive days the
treatment was painful but somewhat
successful the tumor in Lee's breast
ulcerated tightened and shrank producing
the first documented local response in
the history of X-ray therapy a few
months after the initial treatment
though Lee became dizzy and nauseated
the cancer had metastasized to her spine
brain and liver and she died shortly
after grub had stumbled on another
important
observation x-rays could only be used to
treat cancer locally with little effect
on tumors that had already metastasized
inspired by the response even if it had
been temporary grub began using x-ray
therapy to treat scores of other
patients with local tumors a new branch
of cancer medicine radiation oncology
was born with x-ray clinics mushrooming
up in Europe and America by the early
1900s less than a decade after rin's
discovery doctors waxed ecstatic about
the possibility of curing cancer with
radiation I believe this treatment is an
absolute cure for all forms of cancer a
Chicago physician noted in 1901 I do not
know what its limitations are with the
cu's discovery of radium In 1902
surgeons could beam thousandfold more
powerful bursts of energy on tumors
conferences and societies on highd does
radiation therapy were organized in a
flurry of excitement radium was in fused
into gold wires and stitched directly
into tumors to produce even higher local
doses of x-rays surgeons implanted radon
pellets into abdominal tumors by the
1930s and 40s America had a national
surplus of radium so much so that it was
being advertised for sale to lay people
in the back pages of journals vacuum
tube technology advanced in parallel by
the mid 1950s variant of these tubes
could deliver blisteringly high do poses
of X-ray energy into cancerous tissues
radiation therapy catapulted cancer
medicine into its atomic age and age
repete with both promise and Peril
certainly the vocabulary the images and
the metaphors bore the potent symbolism
of atomic power unleashed on cancer
there were cyclotrons and super voltage
rays and linear accelerators and neutron
beams one man was asked to think of his
X-ray therapy as Millions of tiny
bullets of energy another account of a
radiation treatment is imbued with the
thrill and horror of a space journey the
patient is put on a stretcher that is
placed in the oxygen chamber as a team
of six doctors nurses and technicians
hover at chamberside the radiologist
Maneuvers a betatron into position after
slamming shut a hatch at the end of the
chamber technicians Force oxygen in
after 15 minutes Under full pressure
the radiologist turns on the betatron
and shoots radiation at the tumor
following treatment the patient is
decompressed in deep sea diver fashion
and taken to the recovery room stuffed
into Chambers herded in and out of
hatches hovered upon monitored through
closed circuit television pressurized
oxygenated decompressed and sent back to
a room to recover patients weathered the
onslaught of radiation therapy as if it
were an invisible benediction and for
certain forms of cancer it was a
benediction like surgery radiation was
remarkably effective at obliterating
locally confined cancers breast tumors
were pulverized with x-rays lymphoma
lumps melted away one woman with a brain
tumor woke up from her year-long coma to
watch a basketball game in her hospital
room but like surgery Radiation Medicine
also struggled against its inherent
limits Emil grub had already encountered
the first of these limits with his
earliest experimental treatments since
x-rays could only be directed locally
radiation was of limited use for cancers
that had metastasized one could double
and quadruple the doses of radiant
energy but this did not translate into
more cures instead indiscriminate
irradiation left patients scarred
blinded and scalded by dozes that had
far exceeded tolerability the second
limit was far more Insidious radiation
produced cancers the very effect of
x-rays killing rapidly dividing cells
DNA damage also created cancer-causing
mutations in genes in the 1910s soon
after the curies had discovered radium a
New Jersey Corporation called us radium
began to mix radium with paint to create
a product called undar radium infused
paint that emitted a greenish white
light at night although aware of the
many injurious effects of radium us
radium promoted undar for clock dials
boasting of glow-in-the-dark watches
watch painting was a precise and
artisanal craft and young women with
Nimble steady hands were commonly
employed these women were encouraged to
use the paint without precautions and to
frequently lick the brushes with their
tongues to produce sharp lettering on
watches radium workers soon began to
complain of jaw pain fatigue and skin
and tooth problems in the late 1920s
medical investigations revealed that the
bones in their jaws had necrosed their
tongues had been scarred by irradiation
and many had become chronically anemic a
sign of severe bone marrow damage some
women tested with radioactivity counters
were found to be glowing with
radioactivity over the next decades
dozens of radium induced tumors sprouted
in these radium exposed worker sarcomas
and leukemias and Bone tongue neck and
jaw tumors in
1927 a group of five severely Afflicted
women in New Jersey collectively termed
radium Girls by the media sued us radium
none of them had yet developed cancers
they were suffering from the more acute
effects of radium toxicity jaw skin and
tooth necrosis a year later the case was
settled out of court with a compensation
of $10,000 each to the girls and $600
per year to cover living and medical
expenses the compensation was not widely
collected many of the radium girls too
weak even to raise their hands to take
an oath in court died of Leukemia and
other cancer soon after their case was
settled Marie curri died of leukemia in
July
1934 Emil grub who had been exposed to
somewhat weaker x-rays also succumbed to
the deadly late effects of chronic
radiation by the midnight 1940s Grub's
fingers had been amputated one by one to
remove necrotic and gangrenous bones and
his face was cut up in repeated
operations to remove radiation induced
tumors and premalignant warts in 1960 at
the age of 85 he died in Chicago with
multiple forms of cancer that had spread
throughout his body the complex
intersection of radiation with cancer
cancer curing at times cancer causing at
others dampened the initial enthusi ASM
of cancer scientists radiation was a
powerful invisible knife but still a
knife and a knife no matter how deaf or
penetrating could only reach so far in
the battle against cancer a more
discriminating therapy was needed
especially for cancers that were
non-localized in 1932 Willie Meyer the
New York surgeon who had invented the
radical mastectomy contemporaneously
with Halstead was asked to address the
annual meeting of the American Surgical
Association Gravely ill and beden Meyer
knew he would be unable to attend the
meeting but he forwarded a brief six
paragraph speech to be presented on May
31st 6 weeks after Meyer's death his
letter was read aloud to the room full
of Surgeons there is in that letter an
unfailing recognition that cancer
medicine had reached some Terminus that
a new Direction was needed if a
biological systemic after treatment were
added in every instance Meyer wrote We
believe the majority of such patients
would remain cured after a properly
conducted radical operation Meyer had
grasped a deep principle about cancer
cancer even when it begins locally is
inevitably waiting to explode out of its
confinement by the time many patients
come to their doctor the illness has
often spread Beyond surgical control and
Spilled into the body exactly like the
black that Galen had envisioned so
vividly nearly 2,000 years ago in fact
Galen seemed to have been right after
all in The Accidental aoristic way that
democratus had been right about the atom
or arasmus had made a conjecture about
the Big Bang centuries before the
discovery of galaxies Galen had of
course missed the actual cause of cancer
there was no black bile clogging up the
body and bubbling out into tumors and
frustration but he had uncannily
captured something essential about
cancer in his dream and visceral
metaphor cancer was often a humal
disease craike and constantly mobile it
could burrow through invisible channels
from one organ to another it was a
systemic illness just as Galen had once
made it out to be metastatic sites of
cancer can occasionally be treated with
x-rays although with limited success
radiation can be used to control or Pate
metastatic tumors in selected cases but
is rarely Curative in these
circumstances dying and dying those who
have not been trained in chemistry or
medicine may not realize how difficult
the problem of cancer treatment really
is it is almost not quite but almost as
hard as finding some agent that will
dissolve away the left ear say and leave
the right ear unharmed so slight is the
difference between the cancer cell and
its normal ancestor William wlam life is
a IAL incident Paul erck as a school boy
1870 a systemic disease Demands a
systemic cure but what kind of systemic
therapy could possibly cure cancer could
a drug like a microscopic surgeon
perform an ultimate pharmacological
mastectomy sparing normal tissue while
excising cancer cells Willie Meyer
wasn't alone in fantasizing about such a
magical therapy generations of doctors
before him had also fantasized about
such a medicine but how might a drug
coursing through the whole body
specifically attack a diseased organ
specificity refers to the ability of any
medicine to discriminate between its
intended target and its host killing a
cancer cell in a test tube is not a
particularly difficult task the chemical
world is packed with malevolent poisons
that even in infinitesimal quantities
can dispatch a cancer cell within
minutes the trouble lies in finding a
SEL itive poison a drug that will kill
cancer without annihilating the patient
systemic therapy without specificity is
an indiscriminate bomb for an
anti-cancer poison to become a useful
drug Meer knew it needed to be a
fantastically Nimble knife sharp enough
to kill cancer yet selective enough to
spare the patient the hunt for such
specific systemic poisons for cancer was
precipitated by the search for a very
different sort of chemical The Story
begins with colonialism and its Chief
loot cotton in the mid 1850s as ships
from India and Egypt Laden with bales of
cotton unloaded their goods in English
ports cloth Milling boomed into a
spectacularly successful business in
England and Industry large enough to
sustain an entire gamut of subsidiary
Industries a vast network of Mills
sprouted up in the industrial Basin of
the Midlands stretching through Glasgow
Lancashire and Manchester textile
exports dominated the British economy
between 1851 and
1857 the export of printed goods from
England more than quadrupled from 6
million to 27 million pieces per year in
1784 cotton products had represented a
mere 6% of total British exports by the
1850s that proportion had peaked at 50%
the cloth Milling boom set off a boom in
cloth dying but the two industries cloth
and color were oddly out of
technological step dying unlike Milling
was still a pre-industrial occupation
cloth dyes had to be extracted from
perishable vegetable sources Rusty car
from Turkish matter root or deep blues
from the indigo plant using Antiquated
processes that required patience
expertise and constant supervision
printing on textiles with colored dyes
to produce the ever popular Calico
prints for instance was even more
challenging requiring thickeners Morant
and solvents in multiple steps and often
took the D weeks to complete the textile
industry thus needed professional
chemists to dissolve its bleaches and
cleansers to supervise the extraction of
dyes and to find ways to fasten the dyes
on cloth a new discipline called
practical chemistry focused on
synthesizing products for textile dying
was soon flourishing in polytechnics and
institutes all over London in 1856
William Perkin an 18-year-old student at
one of these institutes stumbled on what
would soon become a holy grail of this
industry an inexpensive chemical die
that could be made entirely from scratch
in a makeshift one room laboratory in
his apartment in the East End of London
half of a small but long shaped room
with a few shelves for bottles and a
table Perkin was boiling nitric acid and
Benzene in smuggled glass flasks and
precipitated an unexpected reaction a
chemical had formed inside the tubes
with the color of pale crushed violets
in an era obsessed with Dy making any
colored chemical was considered a
potential die and a quick dip of a piece
of cotton into the flask revealed the
new chemical could color cotton moreover
this new chemical did not bleach or
bleed Perkin called it anoline mve
Perkins Discovery was a godsend for the
textile industry analine move was cheap
and imperishable vastly easier to
produce and store than vegetable dyes as
Perkins soon discovered its parent
compound could act as a molecular
building block for other dieses a
chemical Skeleton on which a variety of
side chains could be hung to produce a
vast spectrum of vivid Colors by the mid
1860s a glut of new synthetic dyes in
shades of lilac blue magenta aquamarine
red and purple flooded the cloth
factories of Europe in 1857 Perkin
barely 19 years old was inducted into
the Chemical Society of London as a full
fellow one of the youngest in its
history to be thus honored analine move
was discovered in England but D making
reached its chemical Zenith in Germany
in the late 1850s Germany a rapidly
industrializing Nation had been itching
to compete in the cloth markets of
Europe and America but unlike England
Germany had scarcely any access to
Natural dyes by the time it had entered
the scramble to capture colonies the
world had already been sliced up into so
many parts with little left to divide
German cloth Millers thus threw
themselves into the development of
artificial dyes hoping to rejoin an
industry that they had once almost given
up as a lost cause Dy making in England
had rapidly become an intricate chemical
business in Germany goated by the
textile industry CET by national
subsidies and driven by expansive
economic growth synthetic chemistry
underwent an even more colossal boom in
1883 the German output of azarin the
brilliant red chemical that imitated
natural Carmine reached 12,000 tons
dwarfing the amount being produced by
Perkins Factory in London German
chemists rushed to produced brighter
stronger cheaper chemicals and muscled
their way into textile factories all
around Europe by the mid 1880s Germany
had emerged as the champion of the
chemical arms race which pressed a much
uglier military one to become the die
basket of Europe initially the German
textile chemists lived entirely in the
shadow of the Dy industry but emboldened
by their successes the chemists began to
synthesize not just dyes and solvents
but an entire universe of new molecules
phenols alcohols bromides alkaloids
alerin and amides chemicals never
encountered in nature by the late 1870s
synthetic Chemists in Germany had
created more molecules than they knew
what to do with practical chemistry had
become almost a caricature of itself an
industry seeking a practical purpose for
the products that it had so frantically
raced to invent early interactions
between synthetic chemistry and Medicine
had largely been dis pointing Gideon
Harvey a 17th century physician had once
called chemists the most impudent
ignorant flatulent fleshy and vainly
boasting sort of mankind the mutual
scorn and animosity between the two
disciplines had persisted in 1849 August
Hoffman William Perkins teacher at the
Royal College gloomily acknowledged the
chasm between medicine and chemistry
none of these compounds have as yet
found their way into any of the
appliances of life we have not been able
to use them for curing disease but even
Hoffman knew that the boundary between
the synthetic world and the natural
world was inevitably collapsing in 1828
a Berlin scientist named Friedrich wer
had sparked a metaphysical storm in
science by boiling ammonium cyanate a
plain inorganic salt and creating Ura a
chemical typically produced by the
kidneys the wer experiment seemingly
trivial had enormous implications Ura
was a natural chemical while its
precursor was an inorganic salt that a
chemical produced by natural organisms
could be derived so easily in a flask
threatened to overturn the entire
conception of living organisms for
centuries the chemistry of living
organisms was thought to be imbued with
some mystical property a vital Essence
that could not be duplicated in a
laboratory a theory called vitalism
Waller's experiment demolished vitalism
organic and inorganic chemicals he
proved were interchangeable biology was
chemistry perhaps even a human body was
no different from a bag of busily
reacting chemicals a beaker with arms
legs eyes brain and soul with vitalism
dead the extension of this logic to
Medicine was inevitable if the chemicals
of life could be synthesized in a
laboratory could they work on living
systems if biology and chemistry were so
interchangeable could a molecule
concocted in a flask affect the inner
workings of a biological organism wer
was a physician himself and with his
students and collaborators he tried to
backpedal from the chemical world into
the medical one but his synthetic
molecules were still much too simple
mere stick figures of chemistry where
vastly more complex molecules were
needed to intervene on living cells but
such multifaceted chemicals already
existed
the Laboratories of the die factories of
Frankfurt were full of them to build his
interdisciplinary bridge between biology
and chemistry wer only needed to take a
short day trip from his laboratory in
Gering in to the labs of Frankfurt but
neither wer nor his students could make
that last connection the vast panel of
molecules sitting idly on the shelves of
the German textile chemists the
precursors of a revolution in medicine
may as well have been a continent away
it took a full 50 years after Waller's
Ura experiment for the products of the D
industry to finally make physical
contact with living cells in 1878 in
leipsig a 24-year-old medical student
Paul Erick hunting for a thesis project
proposed using cloth dyes analine and
its color derivatives to stain animal
tissues at best erck hoped that the dyes
might stain the tissues to make
microscopy easier but to his
astonishment the dieses were were far
from indiscriminate darkening agents
analine derivatives stained only parts
of the cell silhouetting certain
structures and leaving others untouched
the dyes seemed able to discriminate
among chemicals hidden inside cells
binding some and sparing others this
molecular specificity encapsulated so
vividly in that reaction between a Dy
and a cell began to haunt Erick in 1882
working with Robert kooch he discovered
yet another novel chemical stain this
time for mobac the organisms that Koch
had discovered as the cause of
tuberculosis a few years later erck
found that certain toxins injected into
animals could generate antitoxins which
bound and inactivated poisons with
extraordinary specificity these
antitoxins would later be identified as
antibodies he purified a potent serum
against defia toxin from the blood of
horses then moved to the Institute for
Sarah research and serum testing in
steglitz to prepare the serum in gallon
buckets and then to Frankfurt to set up
his own laboratory but the more widely
Erick explored the biological world the
more he spiraled back to his original
idea the biological Universe was full of
molecules picking out their Partners
like clever locks designed to fit a key
toxins clinging inseparably to
antitoxins dyes that highlighted only
particular parts of cells chemical
stains that could nimbly pick out one
class of germs from a mixture of
microbes if biology was an elaborate mix
and match game of chemicals erck reason
what if some chemical could discriminate
bacterial cells from animal cells and
kill the former without touching the
host returning from a conference late
one evening in the cramped compartment
of a Night Train from Berlin to
Frankfurt Erick animatedly described his
idea to two fellow scientists it has
occurred to me that it should be
possible to find artificial substances
which are really and specifically
Curative for certain diseases not merely
palliatives acting favorably on one or
another symptom such Curative substances
a priori must directly destroy the
microbes responsible for the disease not
by action from a distance but only when
the chemical compound is fixed by the
parasites the parasites can only be
killed if the chemical compound has a
particular relation a specific affinity
for them by then the other inhabitants
of erick's train compartment had dozed
off to sleep but this rant in a train
compartment was one of medicine's most
important ideas in its distilled
primordial form chemotherapy the use of
specific chemicals to heal the diseased
body was conceptually born in the middle
of the night Erick began looking for his
Curative substances in a familiar place
the Treasure Trove of D industry
chemicals that had proved so crucial to
his earlier biological experiments
his laboratory was now physically
situated near the booming die factories
of Frankfurt the Frankfurter analin
farbin Fabric and the Leopold cassella
Company and he could easily procure die
chemicals and derivatives via a short
walk across the valley with thousands of
compounds available to him Erick
embarked on a series of experiments to
test their biological effects in animals
he began with a hunt for antimicrobial
chemicals in part because he already
knew that chemical dieses could
specifically bind microbial cells he
infected mice and rabbits with trapano
gandi the parasite responsible for the
dreaded sleeping sickness then injected
the animals with chemical derivatives to
determine if any of them could halt the
infection after several hundred
chemicals erlick and his collaborators
had their first antibiotic hit a
brilliant Ruby color die derivative that
erli called tripen red it was a name
disease juxtaposed with a die color that
captured nearly a century of medical
history galvanized by his Discovery erck
Unleashed volleys of chemical
experiments a universe of biological
chemistry opened up before him molecules
with peculiar properties a cosmos
governed by idiosyncratic rules some
compounds switched from precursors into
active drugs in the
bloodstream others transformed backward
from active drugs to inactive molecules
some excreted in the urine others
condensed in the bile or fell apart
immediately in the blood one molecule
might survive for days in an animal but
its chemical cousin variant by just a
few critical atoms might vanish from the
body in minutes on April 19th 1910 at
the densely packed Congress for Internal
Medicine in voden erck announced that he
had discovered yet another molecule with
specific Affinity this one a blockbuster
the new drug
cryptically called compound
606 was active against a notorious
microbe treponema padum which caused
syphilis in erick's Era syphilis the
secret malady of 18th century Europe was
a sensational illness a tabloid
pestilence erlick knew that an
anticolitic drug would be an instant
sensation and he was prepared compound
606 had secretly been tested in patients
in the hospital Wards of St Petersburg
then retested in patients with
neurosyphilis at the magniberg hospital
each time with remarkable success a
gigantic Factory funded by Hooks
Chemical Works was already being built
to manufacture it for commercial use
erck successes with tripan red and
compound 606 which he named salvan from
the word salvation proved that diseases
were just pathological locks waiting to
be picked by the right molecules the
line of potentially curable illnesses
now stretched endlessly before him erck
called his drugs magic bullets bullets
for their capacity to kill and magic for
their specificity it was a phrase with
an ancient alchemic ring that would
sound insistently through the future of
oncology erick's Magic Bullets had one
last Target to fa cancer syphilis and
trypanosomiasis are microbial diseases
Erick was slowly inching toward his
ultimate goal the malignant human cell
between 1904 and 1908 he rigged several
elaborate schemes to find an anti-cancer
drug using his vast arsenal of chemicals
he tried amides analin sulfa derivatives
arsenics bromides and alcohols to kill
cancer cells none of them worked what
was poisoned to cancer cells he found
was inevitably poison to normal cells as
well discouraged he tried even more
fantastical strategies he thought of
starving saroma cells of metabolites or
tricking them into death by using decoy
molecules a strategy that would pressage
subar Ra's anti-folate derivatives by
nearly 50 years but the search for the
ultimate discriminating anti-cancer drug
proved fruitless his pharmacological
bullets far from magical were either too
indiscriminate or too weak in 1908 soon
after erck won the Nobel Prize for his
discovery of the prin principle of
specific Affinity Kaiser Wilhelm of
Germany invited him to a private
audience in his Palace the Kaiser was
seeking counil a noted hypochondriac
afflicted by various real and imagined
ailments he wanted to know whether Erick
had an anti-cancer drug within reach
erck hedged the cancer cell he explained
was a fundamentally different Target
from a bacterial cell specific Affinity
relied paradoxically not on affinity but
on its opposite on difference erck
chemicals had successfully targeted
bacteria because bacterial enzymes were
so radically dissimilar to human enzymes
with cancer it was the similarity of the
cancer cell to the normal human cell
that made it nearly impossible to Target
Erick went on in this vein almost musing
to himself he was circling around
something profound an idea in its
infancy to Target the abnormal cell one
would need to decipher the biology of
the normal cell he had returned decades
after his first encounter with analine
to specificity again to the barcodes of
biology hidden inside every living cell
er's thinking was lost on the Kaiser
having little interest in this cheerless
disquisition with no obvious end he cut
the audience short in 1915 erck fell ill
with tuberculosis a disease that he had
likely acquired from his days in K's
laboratory he went to recuperate in bad
Hamburg a spa Town famous for its
healing Carbonic salt baths from his
room overlooking the distant Plains
below he watched bitterly as his country
pitched itself into the first world war
the die factories that had once supplied
his therapeutic chemicals bear and hooks
among them were converted to massive
producers of chemicals that would be
turned into precursors for war gases one
particular toxic gas was a colorless
blistering liquid produced by reacting
the solvent thiodiglycol a d
intermediate with boiling hydrochloric
acid the gases smell was unmistakable
described alternatively as reminiscent
of mustard burnt garlic or horseradishes
ground on a fire came to be known as
mustard gas on the foggy night of July
12th
1917 2 years after erick's death a
volley of artillery shells marked with
small yellow crosses rained down on
British troops stationed near the small
Belgian town of Ira the liquid in the
bombs quickly vaporized a thick
yellowish Green Cloud veiling the sky as
a soldier recalled then diffused through
the cool night air the men in their
barracks and trenches asleep for the
night awoke to a nauseatingly sharp
smell that they would remember for
decades to come the ACD whiff of
horseradishes spread through the chalk
Fields within seconds soldiers ran for
cover coughing and sneezing in the mud
the blind scrambling among the dead
mustard gas diffused through leather and
rubber and soaked through layers of
cloth it hung like a toxic Mist over the
battlefield for days until the dead
smelled of mustard on that night alone
mustard gas killed 2,000 soldiers in a
single year it left hundreds of
thousands dead in its wake the acute
short-term effects of nitrogen mustard
the respiratory complications the burnt
skin the blisters the blindness were so
amply monstrous that its long-term
effects were overlooked in 1919 a pair
of American Pathologists Edward and
Helen kumhar analyzed the effects of the
eer bombing on the few men who had
survived it they found that the
survivors had an unusual condition of
the bone marrow the normal blood forming
cells had dried up the bone marrow in a
bizarre mimicry of the scorched and
blasted Battlefield was markedly
depleted the men were anemic and needed
transfusions of blood often up to once a
month they were prone to infections
their white cell counts often hovered
persistently below normal in a world
less preoccupied with other Horrors this
news might have caused a small sensation
among cancer doctors although evidently
poisonous this chemical had after all
targeted the bone marrow and wiped out
only certain populations of cells a
chemical with specific Affinity but
Europe was full of horror stories in
1919 and this seemed no more remarkable
than any other the kumars published
their paper in a second tier medical
journal and it was quickly forgotten in
the Amnesia of war the wartime chemists
went back to their labs to devise new
chemicals for other battles and the
inheritors of erck legacy when hunting
Elsewhere for his specific chemicals
they were looking for a Magic Bullet
that would rid the body of cancer not a
toxic gas that would leave its victims
half dead blind blistered and
permanently anemic that their bullet
would eventually appear out of that very
chemical weapon seemed like a perversion
of specific Affinity a ghoulish
Distortion of ERX dream poisoning the
atmosphere what if this mixture do not
work at all what if if it be a
poison Romeo and Juliet we shall so
poison the atmosphere of the First Act
that no one of decency shall want to see
the playr to the end James Watson
speaking about chemotherapy
1977 every drug the 16th century
physician paracelsus once opined is a
poison in Disguise cancer chemotherapy
consumed by its fiery Obsession to
obliterate the cancer cell found it
roots in the obverse logic every poison
might be a drug in Disguise on December
2nd
1943 more than 25 years after the yellow
cross bombs had descended on ipra a
fleet of lwaa planes flew by a group of
American ships huddled in a harbor just
outside Bari in southern Italy and
released a volley of shells the ships
were instantly on fire unbeknown even to
its own crew one of the ships in the
fleet the John Harvey was stockpiled
with 70 tons of mustard gas stowed away
for possible use as the Harvey blew up
so did its toxic payload the Allies had
in effect bombed themselves the German
raid was unexpected and a terrifying
success fishermen and residents around
the Barry Harbor began to complain of
the whiff of burnt garlic and
horseradishes in the breeze grimy oil
soaked men mostly Young American Sailors
were dragged out from the water seizing
with pain and Terror their eyes swollen
shut they were given tea and wrapped in
blankets which only trapped the gas
closer to their bodies of the 617 men
rescued 83 died within the first week
the gas spread quickly over the Bari
Harbor leaving an arc of Devastation
nearly a thousand men and women died of
complications over the next months the
Bari incident as the media called it was
a terrible political embarrassment for
the Allies the injured Soldiers and
Sailors were swiftly relocated to the
states and medical examiners were
secretly flown in to perform autopsies
on the dead civilians the autopsies
revealed what the crumar had noted
earlier in the men and women who had
initially survived the bombing but
succumbed later to injuries white blood
cells had virtually vanished in their
blood and the bone marrow was scorched
and depleted the gas had specifically
targeted bone Maro cells a grotesque
molecular parody of ERX healing
chemicals the Bari incident set off a
frantic effort to investigate War gases
and their effects on soldiers an
undercover unit called the chemical
warfare unit housed within the wartime
office of scientific research and
development was created to study War
gases contracts for research on various
toxic compounds were spread across
research institutions around the nation
the contract for investigating nitrogen
mustard was issued to two scientists
Lewis Goodman and Alfred Gilman at Yale
University Goodman and Gilman weren't
interested in the vesicant properties of
mustard gas its capacity to burn skin
and membranes they were captivated by
the crumar effect the gas's capacity to
decimate white blood cells could this
effect or some ulated cousin of it be
harnessed in a controlled setting in a
hospital in tiny monitor do es to Target
malignant white cells to test this
concept Gilman and Goodman began with
animal studies injected intravenously
into rabbits and mice the mustards made
the normal white cells of the blood and
bone marrow almost disappear without
producing all The Nasty vesan actions
dissociating the two pharmacological
effects encouraged Gilman and Goodman
moved on to human studies focusing on
lymphomas cancers of the lymph glands in
they persuaded a thoracic surgeon Gustav
linog to treat a 48-year-old New York
silver smith with lymphoma with 10
continuous doses of intravenous mustard
it was a one-off experiment but it
worked in men as in mice the drug
produced miraculous remissions the
swollen glands disappeared clinicians
described the phenomenon as an eerie
softening of the cancer as if the hard
carapace of cancer that Galen had so
vividly described nearly 2,000 years ago
had melted away but the responses were
followed inevitably by relapses the
soften tumors would Harden again and
recur just as farber's leukemias had
vanished then reappeared violently Bound
by secrecy during the War years Goodman
and Gilman eventually published their
findings in
1946 several months before farber's
paper on antifolates appeared in the
Press just a few hundred miles south of
Yale at the buroughs welcome laboratory
in New York the biochemist George
hitchings had also turned to erick's
method to find molecules with a specific
ability to kill cancer cells inspired by
yell subar Ra's antifolates hitchings
focused on synthesizing decoy molecules
that when taken up by cells killed them
his first targets were precursors of DNA
and RNA hitchings his approach was
broadly disdained by academic scientists
as a fishing Expedition scientists in
Academia stood disdainfully apart from
this kind of activity a colleague of
hitchings is recalled they argued that
it would be premature to attempt
chemotherapy without sufficient basic
knowledge about biochemistry physiology
and pharmacology in truth the field had
been sterile for 35 years or so since
erick's work by
1944 hitchings fishing Expedition had
yet to yield a single chemical fish
mounds of bacterial plates had grown
around him like a molding decrepit
garden with still no sign of a promised
drug almost on Instinct he hired a young
assistant named Gertrude Ellen whose
future seemed even more precarious than
hitchings is the daughter of Lithuanian
immigrants born with a precocious
scientific intellect and a thirst for
chemical knowledge Ellen had completed a
master's degree in chemistry from New
York University in 1941 while teaching
High School science during the day and
Performing her research for her thesis
at night and on weekends although highly
qualified talented and driven she had
been unable to find a job in an academic
laboratory frustrated by repeated
rejections she had found a position as a
supermarket product supervisor when
hitchings found Trudy Ellen who would
soon become one of the most Innovative
synthetic chemists of her generation and
a future Nobel laurate she was working
for a food lab in New York testing the
acidity of pickles and the color of egg
yolk going into mayonnaise rescued from
a life of pickles and mayonnaise
Gertrude Ellen leapt into synthetic
chemistry like hitchings she started off
by hunting for chemicals that could
block bacterial growth by inhibiting DNA
but then added her own strategic twist
instead of sifting through mounds of
unknown chemicals at random Ellen
focused on one class of compounds called
purine
purines were ring-like molecules with a
central core of six carbon atoms that
were known to be involved in the
building of DNA she thought she would
add various chemical side chains to each
of the six carbon atoms producing dozens
of new variants of purine Ellen's
collection of new molecules was a
strange merry goor round of beasts one
molecule two six diaminopurine was too
toxic at even low doses to give the drug
to animals another molecule smell like
garlic purified a thousand times many
were unstable or useless or both but in
1951 Ellen Found A variant molecule
called six mercaptopurine or
6mp 6mp failed some preliminary
toxicological tests on animals the drug
is strangely toxic to dogs and was
nearly abandoned but the success of
mustard gas in killing cancer cells had
boosted the confidence of early
chemotherapist in 1948 Cornelius Dusty
rhods a former Army officer left his
position as chief of the Army's chemical
warfare unit to become the director of
the memorial hospital and its attached
Research Institute thus sealing the
connection between the chemical warfare
of the battlefields and chemical warfare
in the body intrigued by the cancer
killing properties of poisonous
chemicals roads actively pursued a
collaboration between hitchings and
Ellens Lab at buroughs welcome and
Memorial Hospital within months of
having been tested on cells in a Petri
dish 6mp was packaged off to be tested
in human patients predictably the first
Target was acute lymphoblastic leukemia
the rare tumor that now occupied the
Limelight of oncology in the early 1950s
two physician scientists Joseph burchel
and Mary Lois Murphy launched a clinical
trial at Memorial to use 6mp on children
with all burchel and Murphy were
astonished by the Speedy remissions
produced by
6mp leukemia cells flickered and
vanished in the bone marrow and the
blood often within a few days of
treatment but like the remissions in
Boston these were disappointingly
temporary lasting only a few weeks as
with Farber antifolates there was only a
fleeting glimpse of a cure the goodness
of Show Business the name Jimmy is a
household word in New England a nickname
for the boy next door the house that
Jimmy built I've made a long voyage and
been to a strange country and I've seen
the dark man very close Thomas wolf
flickering and feeble the leukemia
remissions in Boston and New York
nevertheless mesmerized Farber if
lymphoblastic leukemia one of the most
lethal forms of cancer could be thwarted
by two distinct chemicals even if only
for a month or two then perhaps a deeper
principle was at stake perhaps perap a
series of such poisons was hidden in the
chemical World perfectly designed to
obliterate cancer cells but spare normal
cells the fingerling of that idea kept
knocking in his mind as he paced up and
down the wards every evening writing
notes and examining smears late into the
night perhaps he had stumbled upon an
even more provocative principle that
cancer could be cured by chemicals alone
but how might he jumpstart the discovery
of these incredible chemicals his
operation in Boston was clearly far too
small how might he create a more
powerful platform to propel him toward
the cure for childhood leukemia and then
for cancer at large scientists often
study the past as obsessively as
historians because few other professions
depend so acutely on it every experiment
is a conversation with a prior
experiment every new Theory a reputation
of the old Farber 2 studied the past
compulsively and the episode episode
that pivotally fascinated him was the
story of the national polio campaign as
a student at Harvard in the
1920s Farber had witnessed polio
epidemics sweeping through the city
leaving waves of paralyzed children in
their wake in the acute phase of polio
the virus can paralyze the diaphragm
making it nearly impossible to breathe
even a decade later in the mid 1930s the
only Treatment available for this
paralysis was an artificial respirator
known as the iron lung as Farber had
rounded on the wards of children's
hospital as a resident iron lungs had
continuously huffed in the background
with children suspended Within These
dreaded Contraptions often for weeks on
end the suspension of patients inside
these iron lungs symbolized the limbo
likee paralytic state of polio research
little was known about the nature of the
virus or the biology of the infection
and campaigns to control the spread of
polio were poorly advertised and
generally ignored by the public polio
research was shaken out of its torper by
Franklin Roosevelt in
1937 a victim of a prior epidemic
paralyzed from the waist down Roosevelt
had launched a polio hospital and
Research Center called the warm springs
foundation in Georgia in
1927 at first his political advisers
tried to distance His image from the
disease a paralyzed president trying to
March a nation out of a depression was
considered a disastrous image
Roosevelt's public appearances were thus
elaborately orchestrated to show him
only from the waist up but reelected by
a staggering margin in
1936 a defiant and resurgent Roosevelt
returned to his original cause and
launched the national foundation for
infantile paralysis an advocacy group to
advance research on and publicize polio
the foundation the largest disease
focused Association in American history
galvanized polio research Within one
year of its launch the actor Eddie caner
created the March of Dimes campaign for
the foundation a massive and highly
coordinated National fundraising effort
that asked every citizen to send
Roosevelt a dime to support polio
Education and Research Hollywood
celebrities Broadway stars and radio
personalities soon joined the bandwagon
and the response was dazzling within a
few weeks
2,680 th000 dimes had poured into the
White House posters were widely
circulated and money and public
attention flooded into polio research by
the late 1940s funded in part by these
campaigns John Enders had nearly
succeeded in culturing poliovirus in his
lab and Sabin and sock building on
Ender's work were well on their way to
Preparing the first polio vaccines
Farber fantasized about a similar
campaign for leukemia perhaps for cancer
in general he envisioned a foundation
for children's cancer that would
spearhead the effort e but he needed an
ally to help launch the foundation
preferably an ally outside the hospital
where he had few allies Farber did not
need to look far in early May 1947 while
Farber was still in the middle of his
aminopterin trial a group of men from
the variety Club of New England led by
Bill Coster toured his laboratory
founded in 1927 in Philadelphia by a
group of men and show business producers
directors actors entertainers and film
theater owners the variety Club had
initially been modeled after the dining
clubs of New York and London but in 1928
just a year after its Inception the club
had unwittingly acquired a more active
social agenda in the winter of 1928 with
the city teetering on the abyss of the
depression a woman had abandoned her
child at the doorstep of the Sheridan
Square film theater a note pinned on the
child read please take care of my baby
her name is Catherine I can no longer
take care of her I have eight others my
husband is out of work she was born on
Thanksgiving Day I have always heard of
the goodness of Show Business and I pray
to God that you will look out for her
the Cinematic melodrama of the episode
and the heartfelt appeal to the goodness
of Show Business made a deep impression
on the members of the fledgling Club
adopting the orphan girl the club paid
for her upbringing and education she was
given the name Catherine variety shared
in her middle name for the club and her
last name for the theater outside which
she had been found the Catherine
Sheridan story was widely reported in
the press and brought more media
exposure to the club than its members
had ever envisioned thrust into the
public eye as a philanthropic
organization the club now made
Children's Welfare its project in the
late 1940s as the boom and post-war
movie making brought even more money
into the club's coffers new chapters of
the club sprouted in cities throughout
the nation Katherine Sheridan's story
and her photograph were printed and
publicized in club offices throughout
the nation Sheridan became the club's
unofficial mascot the influx of money
and public attention also brought a
search for other children's charity
projects coster's visit to the
Children's Hospital in Boston was a
scouting mission to find another such
project he was escorted around the
hospital to the labs and Clinics of
prominent doctors when CER asked the
chief of hematology at Children's for
suggestions for donations to the
hospital the chief was
characteristically cautious well I need
a new microscope he said in contrast
when CER stopped by farber's office he
found an excitable articulate scientist
with a Larger than Life vision a messiah
in a box Farber didn't want a microscope
he had an audacious telescopic plan that
captivated CER Farber asked the club to
help him create a new fund to build a
massive Research Hospital dedicated to
Children's Cancer Farber and CER got
started immediately in early
1948 they launched an organization
called the children's cancer research
fund to jumpstart research and advocacy
around children's cancers in March 1948
they organized a raffle to raise money
and net a145
for 56 an impressive amount to start but
still short of what Farber and CER hoped
for cancer research they felt needed a
more effective message a strategy to
catapult it into public Fame sometime
that spring CER remembering the success
with Sheridan had the inspired idea of
finding a mascot for farber's research
fund a Katherine Sheridan for cancer CER
and Farber searched children's Wards and
farber's clinic for a post child to
pitch the fund to the public it was not
a promising Quest Farber was treating
several children with aminopterin and
the beds in the wards upstairs were
filled with miserable patients
dehydrated and nauseated from
chemotherapy children barely able to
hold their heads and bodies upright let
alone Be paraded publicly as optimistic
mascots for cancer treatment looking
frantically through the patient lists
Farber and CER found a single child
healthy enough to carry the message
lanky cherubic blue-eyed blonde child
named inar gustofson who did not have
leukemia but was being treated for a
rare kind of lymphoma in his intestines
Guston was quiet and serious a
precociously self assured boy from New
Sweden Maine his grandparents were
Swedish immigrants and he lived on a
potato farm and attended a single room
Schoolhouse in the late summer of 1947
just after blueberry season he had
complained of a gnawing wrenching pain
in his stomach doctors in Lewiston
suspecting appendicitis had operated on
his appendix but found the lymphoma
instead survival rates for the disease
were low at 10% thinking that
chemotherapy had a slight chance to save
him his doctors sent Guston to Farber
care in Boston inar Guston though was a
mouthful of a name Farber and CER in a
flash of inspiration
rechristened him Jimmy CER now moved
quickly to Market Jimmy on May 22nd 1948
on a warm Saturday night in the
Northeast Ralph Edwards the host of the
radio show Truth or Consequences
interrupted his usual broadcast from
California and linked to a radio station
in Boston part of the function of Truth
or Consequences Edwards began is to
bring this old parlor game to people who
are unable to come to the the show
tonight we take you to a little fellow
named Jimmy we are not going to give you
his last name because he's just like
thousands of other young fellows and
girls in private homes and hospitals all
over the country Jimmy is suffering from
cancer he's a swell little guy and
although he cannot figure out why he
isn't out with the other kids he does
love his baseball and follows every move
of his favorite team the Boston Braves
Now by The Magic of radio we're going to
span the breadth of the United States
and take you right up to the bedside of
Jimmy in one of America's great cities
Boston Massachusetts and into one of
America's great hospitals the Children's
Hospital in Boston whose staff is doing
such an outstanding job of cancer
research up to now Jimmy has not heard
us give us Jimmy please then over a
crackle of static Jimmy could be heard
Jimmy Hi Edwards hi Jimmy this is Ralph
Edwards of the Truth or Consequences
radio program I've heard you like
baseball
is that right Jimmy yeah it's my
favorite sport Edwards it's your
favorite sport who do you think is going
to win the pennant this year Jimmy the
Boston Braves I hope after more banter
Edwards sprung The Parlor trick that he
had promised Edwards have you ever met
Phil Massie Jimmy no Phil Massie walking
in high Jimmy my name is Phil Massie
Edwards what who's that Jimmy Jimmy
gasping Phil Massie Edwards and where is
he Jimmy in my room Edwards well what do
you know right here in your hospital
room Phil Massie from Berlin Illinois
who's the best home run hitter on the
team Jimmy Jimmy Jeff Heath Heath
entered the room Edwards who's that
Jimmy Yi Jeff de as Jimmy gasped player
after player filed into his room bearing
t-shirts signed baseballs game tickets
and caps Eddie stanky Bob Elliott Earl
torguson Johnny s Alvin dark Jim Russell
Tommy Holmes piano was wheeled in the
Braves struck up the song accompanied by
Jimmy who sang loudly and
enthusiastically offkey Take Me Out to
the Ball Game take me out with the crowd
buy me some and crackerjack I don't care
if I never get back the crowd in
edwards's studio cheered some noting the
poeny of the last line many nearly moved
to tears at the end of the broadcast the
Remote Link from Boston was disconnected
Edwards paused and lowered his voice now
listen folks Jimmy can't hear this can
he we're not using any photographs of
him or using his full name or he will
know about this
let's make Jimmy and thousands of boys
and girls who are suffering from cancer
Happy by aiding the research to help
find a cure for cancer in children
because by researching Children's Cancer
we automatically help the adults and
stop it at the outset now we know that
one thing little Jimmy wants most is a
television set to watch the baseball
games as well as hear them if you and
your friends send in your quarters
dollars and tens of dollars tonight to
Jimmy for the children's cancer research
fund and over $200,000 is contributed to
this worthy cause we'll see to it that
Jimmy gets his television set the
Edwards broadcast lasted 8 minutes Jimmy
spoke 12 sentences and sang One song the
word swell was used five times little
was said of Jimmy's cancer it lurked
unmentionably in the background the
ghost in the hospital room the public
response was staggering even before the
Braves had left Jimmy's room that
evening donors had begun to line up
outside the lobby of the Children's
Hospital Jimmy's mailbox was inundated
with postcards and letters some of them
addressed simply to Jimmy Boston
Massachusetts some sent dollar bills
with their letters or wrote checks
children mailed in pocket money in
quarters and dimes the Braves pitched in
with their own contributions by May 1948
the 20,000 marks set by Coster had long
been surpassed more than
$231,000 had rolled in hundreds of red
and white tin cans for donations for the
Jimmy fund were posted outside baseball
games cans were passed around in film
theaters to collect dimes and quarters
little league players in baseball
uniforms went door-to-door with
collection cans on sweltering summer
nights Jimmy days were held in the small
towns throughout New England Jimmy's
promised television a black and white
set with a 12-in screen set into a
wooden box arrived and was set up on a
white bench between hospital beds in the
fast growing fastc consuming world of
medical research in 1948 the
$231,000 raised by the Jimmy fund was an
impressive but still modest some enough
to build a few floors of a new building
in Boston but far from enough to build a
national scientific edifice against
cancer in comparison in
1944 the Manhattan Project spent $100
million every month at the Oakridge site
in
1948 Americans spent more than
$126 million on Coca-Cola alone but to
measure the genius of the Jimmy campaign
in dollars and cents is to miss its
point for Farber the Jimmy fund campaign
was an early experiment the building of
another model the campaign against
cancer Farber Learned was much like a
political campaign it needed icons
mascots images slogans the strategies of
advertising as much as the tools of
science for any illness to rise to
political prominence it needed to be
marketed just as a political campaign
needed marketing a disease needed to be
transformed politically before it could
be transformed scientifically if
farber's antifolates were his first
discovery in
oncology then this critical truth was
his second it set off a seismic
transformation in his career that would
far out strip his transformation from a
pathologist to a leukemia doctor this
second transformation from a clinician
into an advocate for cancer research
reflected the transformation of cancer
itself the emergence of cancer from its
basement into the glaring light of
publicity would change the trajectory of
this story it is a metamorphosis that
lies at the heart of this book the house
that Jimmy built etymologically patient
means suffer it is not suffering as such
that is most deeply feared but suffering
that degrades Susan sag illness as
metaphor Sydney farber's entire purpose
consists only of hopeless cases medical
World News November 25th
1966 there was a time when Sydney Farber
had joked about the smallness of his
laboratory one assistant and 10,000 mice
he had called it in fact his entire
medical life could have been measured in
single digits one room the size of a
chemist's closet stuffed into the
basement of a hospital One Drug
aminopterin which sometimes briefly
extended the life of a child with
leukemia one remission in five the
longest lasting no longer than one year
by the early months of 1951 however
farber's work was growing exponentially
moving far beyond the reaches of his old
laboratory his outpatient clinic throng
by parents and their children had to be
moved outside the hospital to larger
quarters in a residential apartment
building on the corner of byin Street
and Longwood Avenue but even the new
Clinic was soon overloaded the impatient
Wards at Children's had also filled up
quickly since Farber was considered an
intruder by many of the pediatricians at
Children's increasing Ward space within
the hospital was out of the question
most of the doctors thought him
conceited and inflexible
a Hospital volunteer recalled at
Children's even if there was space for a
few of his bodies there was no more
space for his ego isolated and angry
Farber now threw himself into
fundraising he needed an entire building
to house all his patients frustrated in
his efforts to Galvanize the medical
school into building a new Cancer Center
for Children he launched his own effort
he would build a hospital in the face of
a hospital emboldened by his early
fundraising success Farber devised ever
larger drives for research money relying
on his glitzy retinue of Hollywood stars
political Barons Sports celebrities and
money makers in
1953 when the Braves franchise left
Boston for Milwaukee Farber and CER
successfully approached the Boston Red
Sox to make the Jimmy fund their
official charity Farber soon found yet
another famous recruit Ted Williams a
young ball player of Celluloid glamour
who had just returned after serving in
the Korean War in August
1953 the Jimmy fund planned a welcome
home Ted party for Williams a massive
fundraising bash with a dinner Bild that
$100 per plate that raised
$150,000 by the end of that year
Williams was a regular visitor at
farber's Clinic often trailing a retinue
of tabloid photographers seeking
pictures of the great ball player with a
young cancer patient the Jimmy fund
became a household name and a household
cause a large white piggy bank for
donations shaped like an enormous
baseball was placed Outside The Statler
Hotel advertisements for the children's
cancer research fund were plastered
across Billboards throughout Boston
countless red and white collection
canisters called Jimm's cans sprouted up
outside movie theaters funds poured in
from sources large and small
$100,000 from the NCI $5,000 from a bean
supper in Boston $111 from a lemonade
stand a few dollars from a children's
circus in New Hampshire by the early
summer of
1952 farber's new building a large solid
cube perched on the edge of bie Street
just off Longwood Avenue was almost
ready it was lean functional and modern
self-consciously distinct from the
marbled columns and gargoyles of the
hospitals around it one could see the
obsessive hand of Farber in the details
a product of the 1930s Farber was
instinctively Frugal you can take the
child out of the depression but you
can't take the depression out of the
child Leonard Lauder liked to say about
his generation but with Jimmy's Clinic
Farber pulled out all the stops the wide
cement steps leading up to the front
foyer graded by only an inch so that
children could easily climb them were
steam heated against the brw Boston
blizzards that had nearly stopped
farber's work five Winters before
upstairs the clean well-lit waiting room
had wearing carousels and boxes full of
toys a toy electric train set into a
stone mountain chugged on its tracks a
television set was embedded on the face
of the model Mountain if a little girl
got attached to a doll time reported in
1952 she could keep it there were more
where it came came from a library was
filled with hundreds of books three
rocking horses and two bicycles instead
of the usual portraits of dead
professors that haunted the corridors of
the neighboring hospitals Farber
commissioned an artist to paint
full-size pictures of fairy book
character Snow White Pinocchio and
Jiminy Cricket it was Disney World fused
with cancerland the Fanfare and pom
might have led a casual viewer to assume
that Farber had almost found his cure
for leukemia and the brand new Clinic
was his victory lab but in truth his
goal a cure for leukemia still eluded
him his Boston group had now added
another drug a steroid to their
anti-leukemia regimen and by assiduously
combining steroids and antifolates the
remissions had been stretched out by
several months but despite the most
aggressive therapy the leukemia cells
eventually grew resistant and recurred
often furiously the children who played
with the balls and toy trains in the
bright rooms downstairs were inevitably
brought back to the glum Wards in the
hospital Delirious or comos and Inter
terminal Agony one woman whose child was
treated for cancer in farber's clinic in
the early 50s wrote once I discover that
almost all the children I see are doomed
to die within a few months I never cease
to be astonished by the cheerful
atmosphere that generally prevails true
upon closer examination the parents eyes
look suspiciously bright with tears shed
and unshed some of the children's robust
looks I find are owing to one of the
anti-leukemia drugs that produces a
swelling of the body and there are
children with scars children with
horrible swellings on different parts of
their bodies children missing a limb
children with shaven heads looking pale
and won clearly as a result of recent
surgery children limping or in
wheelchairs children coughing and
children emaciated indeed the closer one
looked the more sharply the reality hit
ensconced in his new Airy building with
dozens of assistants swirling around him
Farber must have been haunted by that
inescapable fact he was trapped in his
own waiting room still looking for yet
another drug to eek out a few more
months of remission in his children his
patients having walked up the fancy
steamed stairs to his office having
pranced around on the musical Carousel
and immersed the elves in the cartoonish
gleam of Happiness would die just as
inexorably of the same kinds of cancer
that had killed them in
1947 but for Farber the lengthening
deepening remissions bore quite another
message he needed to expand his efforts
even further to launch a concerted
battle against leukemia acute leukemia
he wrote In 1953 has responded to a more
marked degree than any other form of
cancer to the new chemicals that have
been developed within the last few years
prolongation of life amelioration of
symptoms and a return to a far happier
and even a normal life for weeks and
many months have been produced by their
use Farber needed a means to stimulate
and fund the effort to find even more
powerful anti-leukemia drugs we are
pushing ahead as fast as
possible he wrote in another letter but
it was not quite fast enough for him the
money that he had raised in Austin has
dwindled to a disturbingly small amount
he noted he needed a larger drive a
larger platform and perhaps a larger
vision for cancer he had outgrown the
house that Jimmy had built part two an
impatient War perhaps there is only one
cardinal sin impatience because of
impatience we were driven out of
paradise because of impatience we cannot
return France Kafka the 3 25,000
patients with cancer who are going to
die this year cannot wait nor is it
necessary in order to make great
progress in the Cure of cancer for us to
have the full solution of all the
problems of basic research the history
of medicine is replete with examples of
cures obtained years decades and even
centuries before the mechanism of action
was understood for these cures Sydney
Farber why don't we try to Conquer
Cancer by America's 200th birthday what
a holiday that would be advertisement
published in the New York Times by the
lasit December
1969 they form a society all of this
demonstrates why few research scientists
are in policy-making positions of public
trust their training for detail produces
tunnel vision and Men of broader
perspective are required for useful
application of scientific progress
Michael shimkin I am aware of some alarm
in the scientific Community that's
singling out cancer for a direct
presidential initiative will somehow
lead to the eventual dismantling of the
National Institutes of Health I do not
share these feelings we are at war with
an Insidious Relentless foe we rightly
demand clear decisive action not endless
committee meetings interminable reviews
and tired justifications of the status
quo lisst Hill in
1831 Alexis dville the French Aristocrat
toured the United States and was Aston
Ed by the obsessive organizational
energy of its citizens Americans of all
ages all conditions and all dispositions
constantly form
associations of a thousand other kinds
religious moral serious feudal general
or restricted enormous or diminutive
tville wrote Americans make associations
to give entertainments to found
seminaries to build ins to construct
churches to diffuse books to send
missionaries to the antipodes if it is
proposed to inculcate some truth or to
Foster some Feeling by the encouragement
of a great example they form a society
more than a century after tville toured
the states as Farber sought to transform
the landscape of cancer he instinctively
grasp the truth behind tville
observation if Visionary changes were
best forged by groups of private
citizens forming societies then Farber
needed such a coalition to launch a
national attack on cancer this was a
journey that he could not begin or
finish alone he needed a colossal force
behind him a force that would far exceed
the Jimmy Fund in influence organization
and money real money and the real power
to transform still lay under
Congressional control but prying open
vast Federal coffers meant deploying the
enormous force of a society of private
citizens and Farber knew that the scale
of lobbying was beyond him there was he
knew one person who possessed the energy
resources and passion for this project a
pugnacious New Yorker who had declared
it her personal mission to transform the
geography of American Health through
group building lobbying and political
action wealthy politically Savvy and
well-connected she lunched with the
Rockefellers danced with the trumans
dined with the kennedies and called Lady
Bird Johnson by her first name Farber
had heard of her from his friends and
donors in Boston he had run into her
during his early political foray in
Washington her disarming smile and
Frozen bant were as recognizable in the
political circles in Washington as in
the salons of New York just as
recognizable was her name Mary Woodard
Lasker Mary Woodard was born in
Watertown Wisconsin in 1900 her father
Frank Woodard was a successful smalltown
Banker her mother Sarah Johnson had
migrated from Ireland in the 1880s
worked as a saleswoman at the Carson's
department store in Chicago and ascended
briskly through professional ranks to
become one of the highest paid sales
women at the store salesmanship as
Lasker would later write was a natural
talent for Johnson Johnson had later
turned from her work at the department
store to lobbying for philanthropic
Ventures and public projects selling
ideas instead of clothes she was as
Lasker once put it a woman who could
sell anything that she wanted to Mary
lasker's own instruction in sales began
in the early 1920s when having graduated
from ratliffe college she found her
first job selling European paintings on
commission for a gallery in New York a
Cutthroat profession that involved as
much Social maneuvering as Kenny
business sense in the mid 1930s Lasker
left the gallery to start an
entrepreneurial venture called Hollywood
patterns which sold simple prefab dress
designs to chain stores once again good
instincts crisscrossed with good timing
as women joined the workforce in
increasing numbers in the
1940s lasker's mass-produced
professional clothes found a wide Market
Lasker emerged from the depression and
the war financially rejuvenated by the
late 1940s she had grown into an
extraordinarily powerful businesswoman a
permanent fixture in the firmament of
New York Society a rising social star in
1939 Mary Woodard met Albert Lasker the
60-year-old president of Lord and Thomas
an advertising firm based in Chicago
Albert Lasker like Mary Woodard was
considered an intuitive genius in his
profession at Lord And Thomas he had
invented and perfected a new strategy of
advertising that he called salesmanship
in print a successful advertisement
Lasker contended
was not merely a conglomeration of
jingles and images designed to seduce
consumers into buying an object rather
it was a Masterwork of copywriting that
would tell a consumer why to buy a
product advertising was merely a carrier
for information and reason and for the
public to grasp its impact information
had to be distilled into its essential
Elemental form each of lasker's widely
successful ad campaigns for sun-kissed
oranges pepsodent toothpaste and Lucky
Strike cigarettes among many others
highlighted the strategy in time a
variant of this idea of advertising as a
lubricant of information and of the need
to distill information into Elemental
iconography would leave a deep and
lasting impact on the cancer campaign
Mary and Albert had a Brisk romance and
a whirlwind courtship and they were
married just 15 months after they met
Mary for the second time Albert for the
third Mary Lasker was now 40 years old
wealthy gracious and enterprising she
now launched a search for her own
philanthropic cause retracing her
mother's conversion from a businesswoman
into a public activist for Mary Lasker
this search soon turned inward into her
personal life three memories from her
childhood and Adolescence haunted her in
one she awakes from a terrifying illness
likely a near fatal bout of bacterial
dissenter or pneumonia febr and Confused
and overhears a family friend say to her
mother that she will likely not survive
Sarah I don't think that you will ever
raise her in another she has accompanied
her mother to visit her family's
laundress in Watertown Wisconsin the
woman is recovering from surgery for
breast cancer radical mctom performed on
both breasts Lasker enters a dark Shack
with a low small cot with seven children
running around and she is struck by the
desolation and misery of the scene the
notion of breasts being excised to Stave
cancer cut off Lasker asks her mother
searchingly puzzles and grips her the
laundress survives cancer Lasker
realizes can be cruel but it does not
need to be fatal in the third she is a
teenager in college and is confined to
an influence award during the epidemic
of 1918 the lethal Spanish Flu rages
outside decimating towns and cities
Lasker survives but the flu will kill
600,000 Americans that year and take
nearly 50 million lives worldwide
becoming the deadliest pandemic in
history a Common Thread ran through
these memories the devastation of
illness so proximal and threatening at
all times and the occasional capacity
still unrealized of medicine to
transform lives Lasker imagined
unleashing the power of medical research
to combat diseases a power that she felt
was still largely untapped in
1939 the year that she met Albert her
life collided with illness again in
Wisconsin her mother suffered a heart
attack and then a stroke leaving her
paralyzed and incapacitated Lasker wrote
To The Head of the American Medical
Association to inquire about treatment
she was amazed and infuriated again at
the lack of knowledge and the unrealized
potential of medicine I thought that was
ridiculous other diseases could be
treated the sulfa drugs had come into
existence vitamin deficiencies could be
corrected such as scurvy and pelra and I
thought there was no good reason why you
couldn't do something about stroke
because people didn't universally die of
stroke there must be some element that
was influential in 1940 after a
prolonged and unsuccessful convalescence
lasker's mother died in Watertown for
Lasker her mother's death brought to a
boil the fury and indignation that had
been building within her for decades she
had found her Mission I am opposed to
heart attacks and cancer she would later
tell a reporter the way one is opposed
to sin Mary Lasker chose to eradicate
diseases as some might eradicate sin
through evangelism if people did not
believe in the importance of a national
strategy against diseases she would
convert them using every means at her
disposal her first convert was her
husband grasping Mary's commitment to
the idea Albert Lasker became her
partner her advisor her strategist her
co-conspirator there are unlimited funds
he told her I will show you how to get
them this idea of transforming the
landscape of American Medical Research
using political lobbying and fundraising
at an unprecedented scale electrified
her the lasers were professional
socialites in the same way that one can
be a professional scientist or a
professional athlete they were
extraordinary networkers lobbyists
minglers conversor persuaders letter
writers cocktail party throwers
negotiators name droppers dealmakers
fundraising and more important friend
raising was instilled in their blood and
the depth and breadth of their social
connections allowed them to reach deeply
into the mind and pockets of private
donors and of the government if a
toothpaste deserved advertising at the
rate of two or 3 or 4 million doll a
year Mary Lasker reasoned then research
against diseases maming and crippling
people in the United States and in the
rest of the world deserved hundreds of
millions of dollars within just a few
years she transformed as businessweek
magazine once put it into the Fairy
Godmother of medical research the Fairy
Godmother blew into the world of cancer
research one morning with the force of
an unexpected typhoon in April
1943 Mary Lasker visited the office of
Dr Clarence cook little the director of
the American Society for the control of
cancer in New York Lasker was interested
in finding out what exactly his Society
was doing to advance cancer research and
how her foundation could help the visit
left her cold the society a professional
organization of doctors and a few
science ssts was self-contained and
moraband an aify Manhattan Social Club
of its small annual budget of about
$250,000 it spent an even smaller
smattering on research programs
fundraising was outsourced to an
organization called the women's field
Army whose volunteers were not
represented on the ascc board to the
lasers who were accustomed to massive
advertising blitzes and saturated media
attention to sales ship in print the
whole effort seemed halfhazard
ineffectual sty and unprofessional
Lasker was bitingly critical doctors she
wrote are not administrators of large
amounts of money they're usually really
small
businessmen small professional men men
who clearly lacked a systematic vision
for cancer she made a $5,000 donation to
the ASC and promised to be back last
quickly got to work on her own her first
priority was to make a vast public issue
out of cancer sidest stepping major
newspapers and prominent magazines she
began with the one Outlet of the media
that she knew would reach furthest into
the trenches of the American psyche
reader digest in October
1943 Lasker persuaded a friend at the
digest to run a series of articles on
the screening and detection of cancer
within weeks the article set off a
deluge of postcards telegrams and
handwritten notes to the Magazine's
office often accompanied by small
amounts of pocket money personal stories
and photographs a soldier grieving the
death of his mother sent in a small
contribution my mother died from cancer
a few years ago we are living in
foxholes in the Pacific Theater of War
but would like to help out a school girl
whose grandfather had died of cancer
enclosed a dollar bill over the next
months the digest received thousands of
letters and $300,000 in donations
exceeding the asc's entire annual budget
energized by the response Lasker Now set
about thoroughly overhauling the
flailing ASC in the larger hopes of
Reviving The flailing effort against
cancer in 1949 a friend wrote to her a
two-pronged attack on the nation's
ignorance of The Facts of its Health
could well be undertaken a longrange
program of joint professional a
cooperation and a shorter range pressure
group The
assc then had to be refashioned into
this shorter range pressure group Albert
Lasker who joined the ascc board
recruited Emerson foot and advertising
executive to join the society to
streamline its organization foot just as
horrified by the miloy workings of the
agency as the lasers drafted an
immediate action plan he would transform
form the morban social club into a
highly organized lobbying group the
Mandate demanded men of action
businessmen movie Producers admin
pharmaceutical Executives lawyers
friends and contacts called from the
lasker's extensive network rather than
biologists epidemiologists medical
researchers and doctors by
1945 the non-medical representation in
the ascc governing board had vastly
increased edging out its former members
the L group as it was called rechristen
the organization the American Cancer
Society or the ACs subtly although
discernably the tone of the society
changed as well under little the ASC had
spent its energies drafting insufferably
detailed memorandums on standards of
Cancer Care for medical practitioners
since there was little treatment to
offer these memoranda were not
particularly useful under the lasers
predictably advertising and fundraising
efforts began to dominate its agenda in
a single year it printed 9 million
educational pieces 50,000 posters 1.5
million window
stickers 165,000 coin boxes 12,000 car
cards and 3,000 window exhibits the
women's field Army the ladies Garden
Club as one Lasker associate scathingly
described it was slowly edged out and
replaced by an intense well-oiled
fundraising machine donations shot
through the roof
$832,000 in
1944 $
4,292 in
1945 $12
m4500 in
1947 money and the shift in public
visibility brought inevitable conflicts
between the former members and the new
ones Clarence little the ascc president
who had once welcomed Lasker into the
group found himself increasingly
marginal ized by the lay group he
complained that the lobbyists and
fundraisers were unjustified Troublesome
and aggressive but it was too late at
the society's annual meeting in
1945 after a bitter Showdown with the
Layman he was forced to resign with
little deposed and the board replaced
foot and Lasker were Unstoppable the
society's bylaws and Constitution were
Rewritten with nearly vengeful swiftness
to accommodate the Takeover
once again emphasizing its lobbying and
fundraising activities in a telegram to
Mary Lasker Jim Adams the president of
the standard Corporation and one of the
chief instigators of the lay group laid
out the new rules arguably among the
more unusual set of stipulations to be
adopted by a scientific
organization the committee should not
include more than four professional and
scientific members the chief executive
should be a layman in those two
sentences Adams epitomized the
extraordinary change that had swept
through the ACs the society was now a
high stakes Juggernaut spearheaded by a
band of fiery Layman activists to raise
money and publicity for a medical
campaign Lasker was the center of this
Collective its nucleating Force its
queen bee collectively the activists
began to be known as the lascarides in
the media it was a name that they
embraced with pride in 5 years Mary
Lasker had raised the Cancer Society
from the dead her shorter range pressure
group was working in full force the
lorites now had their longrange target
Congress if they could obtain Federal
backing for a war on cancer then the
scale and scope of their campaign would
be astronomically multiplied you were
probably the first person to realize
that the war against cancer has to be
fought first on the floor of Congress in
order to continue the fight in
Laboratories and hospitals the breast
cancer patient and activist Rose Kushner
once wrote admiringly to Mary Lasker but
canell Lasker grasped an even more
essential truth that the fight had to
begin in the lab before being brought to
Congress she needed yet another Ally
someone from the world of science to
initiate a fight for science funding the
war on cancer needed a Bonafide
scientific sponsor among all the
advertisers and lobbyists say real
doctor to legitimize the Spin Doctors
the person in question would need to
understand the lorites political
priorities almost
instinctually then back them up with
unquestionable and unimpeachable
scientific Authority ideally he or she
would be immersed in cancer research yet
willing to emerge out of that immersion
to occupy a much larger National Arena
the one man and perhaps the only man who
could possibly fit the role was Sydney
Farber in fact their needs were
perfectly congruent Farber needed a
political lobbyist at as urgently as the
lasit needed a scientific strategist it
was like the meeting of two stranded
Travelers each carrying one half of a
map Farber and Mary Lasker met in
Washington in late 1940s not long after
Farber had shot to National Fame with
his antifolates in the winter of 1948
barely a few months after farber's paper
on antifolates had been published John
heler the director of the NCI wrote to
Lasker introducing her to the idea of ch
therapy and to the doctor who had
dreamed up the notion in Boston the idea
of chemotherapy a chemical that could
cure cancer outright a penicillin for
cancer as the oncologist Dusty roads at
Memorial Hospital liked to describe it
fascinated Lasker by the early 1950s she
was regularly corresponding with Farber
about such drugs Farber wrote back long
detailed Meandering letters scientific
treatises he called the meating her on
his progress in Boston for Farber the
burgeoning relationship with Lasker had
a cleansing clarifying quality a
catharsis as he called it he unloaded
his scientific knowledge on her but more
important he also unloaded his
scientific and political ambition an
ambition he found easily reflected even
magnified In Her Eyes by the mid1 1950s
the scope of their letters had
considerably broadened Farber and Lasker
openly broached the possibility of
launching an allout coordinated attack
on cancer an organizational pattern is
developing at a much more rapid rate
than I could have hoped Farber wrote he
spoke about his visits to Washington to
try to reorganize the National Cancer
Institute into a more potent and
directed Force against cancer Lasker was
already a regular on the hill as one
doctor described her her face with its
shellacked freeze of hair and her
Hallmark gray suit and Pearls
omnipresent on every committee and focus
group related to healthcare Farber 2 was
now becoming irregular dressed perfectly
for his part in a crisp dark suit his
Egghead reading glasses often perched at
the edge of his nose he was a
congressman's spitting image of a
physician scientist he possessed an
Evangelistic Pizzaz for medical science
an observer recalled put a tambourine in
his hands and he would immediately go to
work to farber's Evangelistic tambourine
Lasker added her own drum beats of
enthusiasm she spoke and wrote
passionately and confidently about her
cause emphasizing her points with quotes
and questions back in New York she
employed a retinue of assistants to
scour newspapers and magazines and clip
out articles containing even a passing
reference to cancer all of which she
read annotated on the margins with
questions in small script and
distributed to the other lorites every
week I have written to you so many times
in what is becoming a favorite technique
mental telepathy Farber wrote
affectionately to Lasker but such
letters are never mailed as acquaintance
bloomed into familiarity and familiarity
into friendship Farber and Lasker struck
up a synergistic partnership that would
stretch over decades in a letter written
in
1954 Farber used the word Crusade to
describe their campaign against cancer
the word was deeply symbolic for Sydney
Farber as for Mary Lasker the cancer
campaign was indeed turning into a
crusade a scientific battle imbued with
such fanatical intensity that only a
religious metaphor could capture its
Essence it was as if they had stumbled
upon an unshakable fixed vision of a
cure and they would stop at nothing to
drag even a reluctant Nation toward it
these new friends of
chemotherapy the death of a man is like
the fall of a mighty nation that had
Valiant armies captains and profits and
Wealthy ports and ships all over the
seas but now it will not relieve any
besieged City it will not enter into an
alliance chesaw Milos the fall I had
recently begun to notice that events
outside science such as Mary lasker's
cocktail parties or Sydney farber's
Jimmy fund
had something to do with the setting of
science policy Robert Morrison in 1951
as Farber and Lasker were communicating
with telepathic intensity about a
campaign against cancer a seminal event
drastically altered the tone and urgency
of their efforts Albert Lasker was
diagnosed with colon cancer surgeons in
New York heroically tried to remove the
tumor but the lymph nodes around the
intestines were widely involved and
there was little that could be done
surgically by February
1952 Albert was confined to the hospital
numb with the shock of diagnosis and
awaiting death the sardonic Twist of
this event could not have escaped the
lascarides in their advertisements in
the late 1940s to raise awareness of
cancer the lascarides had often pointed
out that one in four Americans would
succumb to cancer Albert was now the one
in four struck by the very disease that
he had once sought to come Conker it
seems a little unfair one of his close
friends from Chicago wrote with vast
understatement for someone who has done
as much as you have to forward the work
in this field to have to suffer
personally in her voluminous collection
of papers in nearly 800 boxes filled
with Memoirs letters notes and
interviews Mary Lasker left few signs of
her response to this terrifying tragedy
although obsessed with illness she was
peculiarly silent about its corporality
about the vulgarity of dying there are
occasional glimpses of interiority and
grief her visits to the Harkness
Pavilion in New York to watch Albert
deteriorate into a coma or letters to
various oncologists including Farber
inquiring about yet another last ditch
drug in the months before Albert's death
these letters acquired a manic insistent
tone he had seeded metastasis into the
liver and she searched discreetly but
insistently for any possible therapy
however far-fetched that might stay his
illness but for the vast part there was
silence impenetrable dense and
impossibly lonely Mary Lasker chose to
descend into Melancholy alone Albert
Lasker died at 8:00 on the morning of
May 30th
1952 a small private funeral was held in
the Lasker residence in New York in his
obituary the times noted he was more
than a philanthropist for he gave not
only of his substance but of his
experience ability and strength Mary
Lasker gradually forged her way back to
public life after her husband's death
she returned to her routine of
fundraisers balls and benefits her
social calendar filled up dances for
various medical foundations a farewell
party for Harry Truman a fundraiser for
arthritis she seemed
self-composed fiery and energetic
blazing meteorically into the rarified
atmosphere of New York but the person
who charged her way back into New York
Society in 1953 was fundamentally
different from the woman who had left it
a year before something had broken and
annealed within her in the shadow of
Albert's death Mary lasker's cancer
campaign took on a more urgent and
insistent tone she no longer sought a
strategy to publicize a Crusade against
cancer she sought a strategy to run it
we are at war with an Insidious
Relentless foe as her friend Senator
lisst Hill would later put it and a war
of this magnitude demanded a Relentless
total unflinching commitment expediency
must not merely Inspire science it must
invade science to fight cancer the
lorites wanted a radically restructured
cancer agency an NCI rebuilt from the
ground up stripped of it bureaucratic
excesses intensely funded closely
supervised a gold driven Institute that
would decisively move toward finding a
cancer cure the national effort against
cancer Mary Lasker believed had become
ad hoc diffuse and Abstract to
rejuvenate it it needed the disembodied
Legacy of Albert Lasker a targeted
directed strategy borrowed from the
world of business and advertising
farber's life also collided with cancer
a collision that he had perhaps pressed
for a decade in the late 1940s he had
developed a mysterious and chronic
inflammatory disease of the intestines
likely ulcer of colitis a debilitating
precancerous illness that predisposes
the colon and bile duct to cancer in the
mid1 1950s we do not know the precise
date Farber underwent surgery to remove
his inflamed colon at Mount Auburn
Hospital in Boston likely choosing the
small and private Cambridge hospital
across the Charles River to keep his
diagnosis and surgery hidden from his
colleagues and friends on the Longwood
campus it is also likely that more than
just pre-cancer was discovered upon
surgery for in later years Mary Lasker
would refer to Farber as a cancer
survivor without ever divulging the
nature of his cancer proud guarded and
secreet of reluctant to conflate his
battle against cancer with the battle
Farber also pointedly refused to discuss
his personal case publicly Thomas Farber
his son would also not discuss it I will
neither confirm nor deny it he said
although he admitted that his father
lived in the shadow of illness in his
last years an ambiguity that I choose to
respect the only remnant of the colon
surgery was a colostomy bag Farber hid
it expertly under his white cuffed shirt
and His Four button suit during his
Hospital rounds although cloaked in
secrecy and discretion farber's personal
confrontation with cancer also
fundamentally altered the tone and
urgency of his campaign as with Lasker
cancer was no longer an abstraction for
him he had sensed its shadow flitting
Darkly over himself it is not necessary
he wrote In order to make great progress
in the Cure of cancer for us to have the
full solution of all the problems of
basic research the history of medicine
is replete with examples of cures
obtained years decades and even
centuries before the mechanis of action
was understood for these cures patients
with cancer who are going to die this
year cannot wait Farber insisted neither
could he or Mary Lasker Mary Lasker knew
that the stakes of this effort were
enormous the lorites proposed strategy
for cancer ran directly against the
grain of the dominant model for
biomedical research in the 1950s the
Chief Architect of the prevailing model
was a tall gaunt MIT trained engineer
named vavar Bush who had served as the
Director of the office of scientific
research and development osrd created in
1941 the osrd had played a crucial role
during the War years in large part by
channeling American Scientific Ingenuity
toward the invention of Novel military
Technologies for the war to achieve this
the agency had recruited scientists
performing basic Research into projects
that emphasized programmatic research
basic research diffuse and open-ended
inquiry on fundamental questions was a
luxury of Peace time the war demanded
something more urgent and goal directed
new weapons needed to be manufactured
and new technologies invented to Aid
soldiers in the battlefield this was a
battle progressively suffused with
military technology a Wizards War as
newspapers called it and a cadr of
scientific Wizards was needed to help
America win it the Wizards had wrought
astonishing technological magic
physicists had created sonar radar radio
sensing bombs and amphibious tanks
chemists had produced intensely
efficient and lethal chemical weapons
including the infamous War gases
biologists had studied the effects of
high altitude survival and seawater
ingestion even mathematicians the
archbishops of the Arcane had been
packed off to crack secret codes for the
military the Undisputed crown jeel of
this targeted effort of course was the
atomic bomb the product of the osrd Leed
Manhattan Project on August 7th 1945 the
morning after the Hiroshima bombing the
New York Times gushed about the
extraordinary success of the project
University professors who are opposed to
organizing planning and directing
research after the manner of industrial
Laboratories have something to think
about now a most important piece of
research was conducted on behalf of the
Army in precisely the means that adopted
in industrial Laboratories end result an
invention was given to the world in 3
years which it would have taken perhaps
half a century to develop if we had to
rely on Primadonna research scientists
who work alone a problem was stated it
was solved by teamwork by Planning by
competent Direction and not by the mere
desire to satisfy curiosity the
congratulatory tone of that editorial
captured a general sentiment about
science that had swept through the
nation the Manhattan Project Pro had
overturned the prevailing model of
scientific discovery the bomb had been
designed as the time scoffingly put it
not by Tweety Primadonna University
professors wandering about in search of
obscure truths driven by the mere desire
to satisfy curiosity but by a focus
sweat team of researchers sent off to
accomplish a concrete Mission a new
model of scientific governance emerged
from the project research driven by
specific mandates timelines and goals
frontal attack science to use one
scientist's description which had
produced the remarkable technological
boom during the war but vavar Bush was
not convinced in a deeply influential
report to President Truman entitled
science the endless Frontier first
published in
1945 bush had laid out a view of
post-war research that had turned his
own model of wartime research on its
head basic research Bush wrote is
performed without thought of practical
ends it results in general knowledge and
an understanding of Nature and its laws
this general knowledge provides the
means of answering a large number of
important practical problems though it
may not give a complete specific answer
to any one of them basic research leads
to new knowledge it provides scientific
Capital it creates the fund from which
the Practical applications of knowledge
must be
drawn basic research is the pacemaker of
Technology olcal progress in the 19th
century Yankee mechanical Ingenuity
building largely upon the basic
discoveries of European scientists could
greatly Advance the technical Arts now
the situation is different a nation
which depends upon others for its new
basic scientific knowledge will be slow
in its industrial progress and weak in
its competitive position in World Trade
regardless of its mechanical skill
directed targeted research programmatic
science the cause celebra during the War
years Bush argued was not a sustainable
model for the future of American Science
as Bush perceived it even the widely
luded Manhattan Project epitomized the
virtues of basic inquiry true the bomb
was the product of Yankee mechanical
Ingenuity but that mechanical Ingenuity
stood on the shoulders of scientific
discoveries about the fundamental nature
of the atom and the energy locked inside
it research performed notably with no
driving mandate to produce anything
resembling the atomic bomb while the
bomb might have come to life physically
in low Salos intellectually speaking it
was the product of pre-war physics and
chemistry rooted deeply in Europe the
iconic homegrown product of wartime
American Science was at least
philosophically speaking an import a
lesson bush had learned from all of this
was that goal-directed strategies so
useful in Wartime would be of limited
use during periods of peace
frontal attacks were useful on the war
front but post-war science could not be
produced by Fiat so bush had pushed for
a radically inverted model of scientific
development in which researchers were
allowed full autonomy over their
Explorations and open-ended inquiry was
prioritized the plan had a deep and
Lasting influence in Washington the
National Science Foundation NSF founded
in 1950 was explicitly created to
encourage scien ific autonomy turning in
time as one historian put it into a
veritable embodiment of Bush's grand
design for reconciling government money
and scientific Independence a new
culture of research long-term basic
scientific research rather than sharply
focused Quests for treatment and disease
prevention rapidly proliferated at the
NSF and subsequently at the NIH for the
lascarides this augured a profound
conflict a war on cancer they felt
demanded precisely the sort of focus and
undiluted commitment that had been
achieved so effectively at losel World
War II had clearly surcharged medical
research with new problems and new
Solutions it had prompted the
development of Novel resuscitation
techniques research on blood and Frozen
Plasma on the role of adrenal steroids
in shock and on cerebral and cardiac
blood flow never in the history of
medicine as a an Richards the chairman
of the committee on medical research put
it had there been so great a
coordination of medical scientific labor
this sense of common purpose and
coordination galvanized the
lorites they wanted a Manhattan project
for cancer increasingly they felt that
it was no longer necessary to wait for
fundamental questions about cancer to be
solved before launching an allout attack
on the problem Farber had after all
forged his way through the early
leukemia trials with scarcely any forn
knowledge of how aminopterin worked even
in normal cells let alone cancer cells
Oliver heavyside an English
mathematician from the
1920s once wrote jokingly about a
scientist musing at a dinner table
should I refuse my dinner because I
don't understand the digestive system to
heavy side's question Farber might have
added his own should I refuse to attack
cancer because I have not solved its
basic cellular mechanisms other
scientists echoed this frustration the
outspoken Philadelphia pathologist
Stanley Ryman wrote workers in cancer
must make every effort to organize their
work with goals in view not just because
they are interesting but because they
will help in the solution of the cancer
problem Bush's Cult of open ended
curiosity-driven
inquiry interesting science had oied
into Dogma to battle cancer that Dogma
needed to be overturned the first and
most seminal step in this direction was
the creation of a focused drug Discovery
unit for anti-cancer drugs in 1954 after
a furious bout of political lobbying by
lorites the Senate authorized the NCI to
build a program to find chemotherapeutic
drugs in a more directed targeted manner
by 1955 this effort called the cancer
chemotherapy national service center
ccnc was in full swing between 1954 and
196 4 this unit would test
82,791
million mice every year with various
chemicals to find an ideal drug Farber
was ecstatic but impatient the
enthusiasm of these new friends of
chemotherapy is refreshing and seems to
be on a genuine
Foundation he wrote to Lasker in
1955 it nevertheless seems frightfully
slow it sometimes becomes monotonous to
see more and more men brought into the
program go through the joys of
discovering America Farber had meanwhile
stepped up his own drug Discovery
efforts in Boston in the 1940s the soil
microbiologist Selman Waxman had
systematically scoured the world of soil
bacteria and purified a diverse series
of antibiotics like the penicilium mold
which produces penicillin
bacteria also produce antibiotics to
wage chemical warfare on other microbes
one such antibiotic came from a
rod-shaped microbe called actinomyces
Waxman called it actonomy D an enormous
molecule shaped like an ancient Greek
statue with a small headless torso and
two extended Wings actonomy D was later
found to work by binding and damaging
DNA it potently killed bacterial cells
but unfortunately it also killed human
cells limiting its use as an
antibacterial agent but a cellular
poison could always excite an oncologist
in the summer of
1954 Farber persuaded Waxman to send him
a number of antibiotics including
antinomy D to repurpose them as
anti-tumor agents by testing the drugs
on a series of mouse tumors tinoy D
Farber found found was remarkably
effective in mice just a few doses
melted away many Mouse cancers including
leukemias lymphomas and breast cancers
one hesitates to call them cures Farber
wrote expectantly but it is hard to
classify them otherwise energized by the
animal cures in 1955 he launched a
series of Trials to evaluate the
efficacy of the drug in humans etiny D
had no effect on leukemias in children
undeterred Farber Unleashed the drug on
275 children with a diverse range of
cancers lymphomas kidney sarcomas muscle
sarcomas and neuroblastic tumors the
trial was a pharmacist's nightmare
antinomy D was so toxic that it had to
be heavily diluted in Saline if even
minute amounts leaked out of the veins
then the skin around the leak would
necrose and turn black in children with
small veins the drug was often given
through an intraven line inserted into
the scalp the one form of cancer that
responded in these early trials was
wilm's tumor a rare variant of kidney
cancer often detected in very young
children Wilms tumor was typically
treated by surgical removal of the
affected kidney surgical removal was
followed by x-ray radiation to the
affected kidney bed but not all Wilms
cases could be treated using local
therapy in a fraction of cases by the
time the tumor was detected it had
already metastasized usually to the
lungs recalcitrant to treatment there
Wilms tumors were usually bombarded with
x-rays and assorted drugs but with
little hopes of a sustained response
Farber found that antinomy D
administered intravenously potently
inhibited the growth of these lung
metastases often producing remissions
that lasted months intrigued he pressed
further if X-rays and actonomy D could
both attack Wilms metastasis
independently what if the agents could
be combined in 1958 he said a young
radiologist couple named Julio Danio and
Audrey Evans and an oncologist named
Donald pinkle to work on the project
within months the team had confirmed
that X-rays and actonomy D were
remarkably synergistic each multiplying
the Toxic effect of the other children
with metastatic cancer treated with the
combined regimen often resp responded
briskly in about 3 weeks lungs
previously riddled with Wilms tumor
metastasis cleared completely Danio
recalled imagine the excitement of those
days when one could say for the first
time with justifiable confidence we can
fixed that the enthusiasm generated by
these findings was infectious although
combination X-ray and chemotherapy did
not always produce long-term cures Wilms
tumor was the first metastic solid tumor
to respond to chemotherapy Farber had
achieved his long-sought leap from the
world of liquid cancers to solid tumors
by the late
1950s Farber was bristling with a fiery
brand of optimism yet visitors to the
Jimmy fund clinic in the mid 1950s might
have witnessed a more nuanced and
complex reality for Sonia Goldstein
whose 2-year-old son David was treated
with chemotherapy for wilm's tumor in
1956 the clinic seemed perpetually
suspended between two poles both
wonderful and tragic unspeakably
depressing and indescribably hopeful on
entering the Cancer Ward Goldstein would
write later I sense an undercurrent of
excitement a feeling persistent despite
repeated frustrations of being on the
verge of discovery which makes me almost
hopeful we enter a large Hall decorated
with a cardboard train along one wall
halfway down the ward is an authentic
looking stop sign which can flash green
red and Amber lights the Train's engine
can be climbed into and the bell pulled
at the other end of the ward is a
life-size gasoline pump registering
amounts sold and price my first
impression is one of overweening
activity almost snake pit-like in its
intensity it was a snake pit only of
cancer a seething immersed box coiled
with illness hope and Desperation a girl
named Jenny about 4 years old played
with a new set of crayons in the corner
her mother an attractive easily
excitable woman kept Jenny in constant
sight holding her child with the
claw-like intensity of her gaze as Jenny
stooped to pick up the colors no
activity was innocent here anything
might be a sign a symptom a portent
Jenny Goldstein realized has leukemia
and is currently in the hospital because
she developed jaundice her eyeballs are
still yellow preaging fulminant liver
failure she like many of the wards
inhabitants was relatively oblivious to
the meaning of her illness Jenny's only
concern was an aluminum tea kettle to
which she was deeply attached sitting in
a go-kart in the hall is a little girl
who I think at first has been given a
blacke Lucy a 2-year-old suffers from a
form of cancer that spreads to the area
behind the eye and causes hemorrhaging
there
she is not a very attractive child and
whales almost incessantly that first day
so does Debbie an Angelic looking
4-year-old whose face is white and
frowning with suffering she has the same
type of tumor as Lucy a neuroblastoma
alone in a room lies Teddy it takes many
days before I Venture inside it for
skeleton thin and blinded Teddy has a
monstrosity for a face his tumor
starting behind the ear has engulfed one
side of his head and obliterated his
normal features he is fed through a tube
in the nostal and is fully conscious
throughout the ward were little
inventions and
improvisations often devised by Farber
himself since the children were usually
too exhausted to walk tiny wooden
go-karts were scattered about the room
so that the patients could move around
with relative freedom for poles for
chemotherapy were strung up on the carts
to allow chemo to be given at all times
during the day to me Goldstein wrote one
of the most pathetic sites of all that I
have seen is the little Go-Kart with the
little child leg or arm tightly bandaged
to hold needle in vain and a tall four
pole with its buet the combined effect
is that of a boat with masted but no
sail helplessly drifting alone in a
rough Uncharted sea every evening Farber
came to the wards forcefully driving his
own sail lless boat through this rough
and Uncharted sea he paused at each bed
taking notes and discussing the case
often barking out characteristically
brus instructions a retinue followed him
medical residents nurses social workers
psychiatrists nutritionists and
pharmacists cancer he insisted was a
total disease and illness that gripped
patients not just physically but
psychically socially and emotionally
only a multi-pronged multi-disciplinary
attack would stand any chance of
battling this disease he called the
concept total care but despite all
efforts at providing Total Care death
stalked the wards relentlessly in the
winter of
1956 a few weeks after David's visit a
volley of deaths hit Farber Clinic Betty
a child with leukemia was the first to
die then it was Jenny the four-year-old
with the aluminum tea kettle Teddy with
retinoblastoma was next a week later
Axel another child with leukemia bled to
death with hemorrhages in his mouth
Goldstein observed death assumes shape
form and routine parents emerge from
their child's room as they have perhaps
done periodically for days for short
rests a nurse takes them to the doctor's
small office the doctor comes in and
shuts the door behind him later a nurse
brings coffee still later she hands the
parents a large brown paper bag
containing odds and ends of belongings a
few minutes later back at our prominade
we note another empty bed finish in the
winter of 1956 after a prolonged and
bruising battle Sonia's son 3-year-old
David Goldstein died of metastatic Wilms
tumor at the Jimmy fun Clinic having
spent the last few hours of his life
delirious and whimpering under an oxygen
mask Sonia Goldstein left the hospital
carrying her own brown paper bag
containing the remains of her child but
Farber was unfaced the Arsenal of cancer
chemotherapy having been empty for
centuries had filled up with new drugs
the possibilities thrown open by these
discoveries were enormous permutations
and combinations of medicines variations
in Doses and schedules trials containing
two dash three dash and four drug
regimens there was at least in principle
the capacity to retreat cancer with one
drug if another had failed or to try one
combination followed by another this
Farber kept telling himself with
hypnotic conviction was not the finish
this was just the beginning of an allout
attack in her hospital bed on the 14th
floor Carla Reid was still in isolation
trapped in a cool sterile room where
even the molecules of air arrived
filtered through dozens of seves the
smell of antiseptic soap pervaded her
clothes a television occasionally
flickered on and off food came on a tray
labeled with brave optimistic names
chunky potato salad or chicken K but
everything tasted as if it had been
boiled and seared almost to obliteration
it had been the food had to be
sterilized before it could enter the
room Carla husband a computer engineer
came in every afternoon to sit by her
bed Jenny her mother spent the days
rocking mechanically in a chair exactly
as I had found her the first morning
when Carla's children stopped by in
masks and gloves she wept quietly
turning her face toward the window for
Carla the physical isolation of those
days became a barely concealed metaphor
for a much deeper fiercer lonely
a psychological quarantine even more
achingly painful than her actual
confinement in those first two weeks I
withdrew into a different person she
said what went into the room and what
came out were two different people I
thought over and over again about my
chances of surviving through all this
30% I would repeat that number to myself
at night not even a third I would stay
up at night looking up at the ceiling
and think what is 30% what happens 30%
of the time I am 30 years old about 30%
of 90 if someone gave me 30% odds in a
game would I take the odds the morning
after Carla had arrived at the hospital
I walked into her room with sheaves of
paper they were consent forms for
chemotherapy that would allow us to
instantly start pumping poisons into her
body to kill cancer cells chemotherapy
would come in three phases the first
phase would last about a month the drugs
given in Rapid Fire succession would
hopefully send the leukemia into a
sustained remission they would certainly
kill her normal white blood cells as
well her white cell count would drop in
freef fall all the way to zero for a few
critical days she would inhabit one of
the most vulnerable states that modern
medicine can produce a body with no
immune system defenseless against the
environment around it if the leukemia
did go into remission then we would
consolidate and intensify that remission
over several months that would mean more
chemotherapy but at lower doses given
over longer intervals she would be able
to leave the hospital and return home
coming back every week for more
chemotherapy consolidation and
intensification would last for eight
additional weeks perhaps longer the
worst part perhaps I kept for last acute
lymphoblastic leukemia has an ugly
propensity for hiding in the brain the
intravenous chemotherapy that we would
give Carla no matter how potent simply
couldn't break into the sistems and
ventricles that bathed her brain the
bloodb brain barrier essentially made
the brain into a sanctuary an
unfortunate word implying that your own
body could be abetting the cancer for
the leukemia cells to send drugs
directly into that Sanctuary the
medicines would need to be injected
directly into Carla spinal fluid through
a series of spinal taps whole brain
radiation treatment highly penetrant
x-rays dose directly through her skull
would also be used prophylactically
against leukemia growth in her brain and
there would be even more chemotherapy to
follow spanning over 2 years to maintain
the remission if we achieved it
induction
intensification maintenance cure an
arrow in pencil connecting the four
points on a blank piece of paper Carla
nodded when I went through the Avalanche
of chemotherapy drugs that would be used
over the next two years to treat her she
repeated the name softly after me under
her breath like a child discovering a
new tongue twister
cyclophosphamide cabine prednizone
asparaginase adriamycin thioguanine Vin
Christine six
mercaptopurine methotrexate The Butcher
Shop randomized screening trials are
bothersome it takes ages to come to an
answer and these need to be large scale
projects to be able to answer the
questions but there is no second best
option h j tooning annals of oncology
2003 the best doctors seem to have a six
sense about disease they feel its
presence know it to be there perceive
its gravity before any intellectual
process can Define catalog and put it
into words patients sense this about
such a physician as well that he is
attentive alert ready that he cares no
student of medicine should Miss
observing such an encounter of all the
moments in medicine this one is most
filled with drama with feeling with
History Michael lome annals of internal
medicine
1993 it was in Bethesda at the very
Institute that had been likened to a
Suburban golfing club in the 1940s that
the new arsenal of oncology was deployed
on living patients in April 1955 in the
midst of a humid spring in Maryland a
freshly recruited researcher at the
National Cancer Institute named Emil
frech walked up to his new office in the
red brick clinical Center building and
found to his exasperation that his name
had been misspelled on the door with the
last five letters lopped off the plate
on the door read Emil F REI
MD my first thought of course was isn't
it typical of the government it wasn't a
misspelling when frech entered the
office he confronted a tall thin young
man who identified himself as ail free
fr's office with the name correctly
spelled was next door their names not
withstanding the two emls were vastly
different characters frich just 30 5
years old and fresh out of a hematology
fellowship at Boston University was
flamboyant hot-tempered and adventurous
he spoke quickly often explosively with
a booming voice followed Often by an
even more expressive boom of laughter he
had been a medical intern at the
fast-paced ward 55 of the Cook County
Hospital in Chicago and such a nuisance
to the authorities that he had been
released from his contract earlier than
usual in Boston frech had worked with
chester kefir one of minet's colleagues
who had subsequently spearheaded the
production of penicillin during World
War II antibiotics folic acid vitamins
and antifolates were stitched into Fry's
Soul he admired Farber intensely not
just the meticulous academic scientist
but the irreverent impulsive Larger than
Life Farber who could antagonize his
enemies as quickly as he could seduce
his benefactor actors I have never seen
Freer Reich in a moderate mood free
would later say if frech had been a
character in a film he would have needed
a cinematic foil a laurel to his Hardy
or a Felix to his Oscar the tall thin
man who confronted him at the door at
the NCI that afternoon was that foil
where frech was brusk and flamboyant
impulsive to a fault and passionate
about every detail free was cool
composed and cautious
a poised negotiator who preferred to
work backstage Emil free known to most
of his colleagues by his nickname Tom
had been an art student in St Louis in
the 30s he had attended Medical School
almost as an afterthought in the late
1940s served in the Navy in the Korean
War and returned to St Louis as a
resident in medicine he was charming
softspoken and careful a man of few
chosen words to watch him man critically
ill children and their testy nervous
parents was to watch a champion swimmer
glide through water so Adept in the art
that he made Artistry vanish the person
responsible for bringing the two emls to
Bethesda was Gordon Zub the new director
of the nci's clinical Center
intellectual deliberate and imposing a
clinician and scientist known for his
Regal composure zubert had arrived at
the NIH having spent nearly a decade
developing antimalaria drugs during
World War II and exper experience that
would deeply influence his early
interests in clinical trials for cancer
zub's particular interest was children's
leukemia the cancer that Farber had
plunged into the very Forefront of
clinical investigation but to contend
with leukemia Zuber knew was to contend
with its fieriness and brittleness its
Moody volcanic
unpredictability drugs could be tested
but first the children needed to be kept
alive a quintessential delegator in
Eisenhower of canc research as frech
once called him Zuber quickly
conscripted two young doctors to
maintain the front lines of the wards
Freer and free fresh from their
respective fellowships in Boston and St
Louis free drove cross country in a beat
up old studabaker to join Zub Freer
Reich came just a few weeks later in a
ramshackle Oldsmobile containing all his
belongings his pregnant wife and his
9-month-old daughter could easily have
been a formula for disaster but it
worked right from the start the two emls
found that they shared a unique Synergy
their collaboration was symbolic of a
deep intellectual divide that ran
through the front lines of oncology the
rift between over moderated caution and
bold experimentation each time frech
pushed too hard on one end of the
experimental ful off and bringing
himself and his patients to the brink of
disaster-free pushed back to ensure that
the novel quixotic and often deeply
toxic therapies were mitigated by
caution free and Fry's battles soon
became emblematic of the tussles within
the NCI Free's job one researcher
recalled in those days was to keep frech
from getting in trouble Zub had his own
schemes to keep leukemia research out of
trouble as new drugs combinations and
trials proliferated Zuber worried that
institutions would be caught at Cross
purposes squabbling over patients and
protocols when they should really be
battling cancer burchel in New York
Farber in Boston James Holland at
Roswell Park and the two emls at the NCI
were all chomping at the bit to launch
clinical trials and since all was a rare
disease every patient was a precious
resource for a leukemia trial to avert
conflicts Zuber proposed that a
Consortium of researchers be created to
share patients trials data and knowledge
the proposal changed the field zuber's
Co operative group model galvanized
cancer medicine Robert mayor who would
later become the chair of one of these
groups recalls for the first time an
academic oncologist felt as if he had a
community the cancer doctor was not the
outcast anymore not the man who
prescribed poisons from some underground
chamber in the hospital the first group
meeting chaired by Farber was a
resounding success the researchers
agreed to proceed with a series of
common trials called protocols as soon
as possible Zub next set about
organizing the process by which trials
could be run cancer trials he argued had
thus far been embarrassingly chaotic and
disorganized oncologists needed to
emulate the best trials in medicine and
to learn how to run objective unbiased
state-of-the-art clinical trials they
would need to study the history of the
development of antibiotics in the 1940s
as new antibiotics had begun to appear
on the horizon Physicians had
encountered an important quandry how
might one objectively test the efficacy
of any novel drug at the medical
research Council in Britain the question
had taken on a particularly urgent and
rancorous note the discovery of
streptomycin a new antimicrobial drug in
the early 40s had set off a flurry of
optimism that tuberculosis could be
cured strept n killed tuberculosis
causing mob bacteria in Petri dishes but
its efficacy in humans was unknown the
drug was in critically short supply with
doctors pairing to use even a few
milligrams of it to treat a variety of
other infections to ration streptomycin
an objective experiment to determine its
efficacy in human tuberculosis was
needed but what sort of experiment an
English statistician named Bradford Hill
a former victim of t himself proposed an
extraordinary solution Hill began by
recognizing that doctors of all people
could not be entrusted to perform such
an experiment without inherent biases
every biological experiment requires a
control arm untreated subjects against
whom the efficacy of a treatment can be
judged but left to their own devices
doctors were inevitably likely even if
unconsciously so to select certain types
of patients upfront then judge the
effect of a drug on this highly skewed
population using subjective criteria
piling bias on top of bias Hills
proposed solution was to remove such
biases by randomly assigning patients to
treatment with streptomycin versus a
placebo by randomizing patients to each
arm any doctor's biases in patient
assignment would be dispelled neutrality
would be enforced and thus a hypothesis
could be strictly tested Hills
randomized trial was a success the
streptomycin arm of the trial clearly
showed an improved response over the
placebo arm enshrining the antibiotic as
a new antib drug but perhaps more
important it was Hills methodological
invention that was permanently enshrined
for medical scientists the randomized
trial became the most stringent means to
evaluate the efficacy of any
intervention in the most unbiased manner
zuid was inspired by these early
antimicrobial trials he had used these
principles in the late 1940s to test
antimalarials and he proposed using them
to lay down the principles by which the
NCI would test its new protocols the
nci's trials would be
systematic every trial would test a
crucial piece of logic or hypothesis and
produce yes and no answers the trials
would be sequential the lessons of one
trial would lead to the next and so
forth a Relentless March of progress
until leukemia had been cured the trials
would be objective randomized if
possible with clear unbiased criteria to
assign patients and measure responses
trial methodology was not the only
powerful lesson that zuid free and frech
learned from the antimicrobial world the
analogy of drug resistance to
antibiotics was given deep thought Freer
Reich remembered as Farber and burchel
had discovered to their Chagrin in
Boston and New York leukemia treated
with a single drug would inevitably grow
resistant to the drug resulting in the
flickering transient responses followed
by the devastating relapses the
situation was reminiscent of TB like
cancer cells micob bacteria the germs
that caused tuberculosis also became
resistant to antibiotics if the drugs
were used singly bacteria that survived
a single drug regimen divided mutated
and acquired drug resistance thus making
that original drug useless to thwart
this resistance doctors treating TB had
used a blitz Greg of antibiotics two or
three used together like a dense
pharmaceutical blanket meant to smother
all cell division and Stave off
bacterial resistance thus extinguishing
the infection as definitively as
possible but could two or three drugs be
tested simultaneously against cancer or
would the toxicities be so forbidding
that they would instantly kill patients
as frech free and Zuber studied the
growing list of anti-leukemia drugs the
notion of combining drugs emerged with
growing clarity
toxicities not withstanding annihilating
leukemia might involve using a
combination of two or more drugs the
first protocol was launched to test
different doses of farber's Methotrexate
combined with burchinal
6mp the two most active anti-leukemia
drugs three hospitals agreed to join the
NCI Roswell Park and the Children's
Hospital in Buffalo New York the aims of
the trial were kept intentionally simple
one group would be treated with
intensive Methotrexate dosing while the
other group would be treated with milder
and less intensive dosing 84 patients
enrolled on Arrival Day parents of the
children were handed white envelopes
with the randomized assignment sealed
inside despite the multiple centers and
the many egos involved the trial ran
surprisingly smoothly toxicities
multiplied the two drug regimen was
barely tolerable but the Intensive group
fared better with longer and more
durable responses the regimen though was
far from a cure even the intensively
treated children soon relapsed and died
by the end of one year protocol I set an
important precedent zubs and farber's
cherished model of a cancer Cooperative
group was finally in action dozens of
doctors nurses and patients in three
independent hospitals had yoked
themselves to follow a single formula to
treat a group of patients and each one
suspending its own idiosyncrasies had
followed the instructions perfectly this
work is one of the first comparative
studies in the chemotherapy of malignant
neoplastic disease free noted in a world
of ad hoc often desperate strategies
Conformity had finally come to cancer in
the winter of
1957 the leukemia group launched yet
another modification to the first
experiment this time one group re
received a combined regimen while the
other two groups were given One Drug
each and with the question even more
starkly demarcated the pattern of
responses was even clearer given alone
either of the drugs performed poorly
with a response rate between 15 and 20%
but when methat trexate and 6mp were
administered together the remission rate
jumped to
45% the next chemotherapy protocol
launched just 2 years later in 195 9
ventured into even riskier territory
patients were treated with two drugs to
send them into complete remission then
half the group received several months
of additional drugs while the other
group was given a placebo once again the
pattern was consistent the more
aggressively treated group had longer
and more durable responses trial by
trial the group crept forward like a
spring uncoiling to its end in just six
pivotal years the leukemia study group
had slowly worked itself to giving
patients not one or two but four
chemotherapy drugs often in succession
by the winter of
1962 the compass of leukemia medicine
pointed unfailingly in One Direction if
two drugs were better than one and if
three better than two then what if four
anti-leukemia drugs could be given
together in combination as with TB both
free and Freer Reich sensed that this
was the inevitable culmination of the
nci's trials but even if they knew it
subconsciously they tiptoed around the
notion for months the resistance would
be fierce Freer Reich knew the leukemia
Ward was already being called a butcher
shop by others at the NCI the idea of
treating children with three or four
highly cytotoxic drugs was considered
cruel and insane frech said even Zub
could not convince the Consortium to try
it no one wanted to turn the NCI into a
National Institute of Butchery an early
Victory but I do subscribe to the view
that words have very powerful texts and
subtexts War has truly a unique status
War has a very special meaning it means
putting young men and women in
situations where they might get killed
or grievously wounded it's inappropriate
to retain that metaphor for a scholarly
activity in these times of actual War
the NIH is a community of Scholars
focused on generating knowledge to
improve the public health that's a great
activity that's not a war Samuel broer
NCI director in the midst of this nervy
deliberation about the use of four drug
combination therapy free and frech
received an enormously exciting piece of
news just a few doors down from Fry's
office at the NCI two researchers minui
and Roy Herz
had been experimenting with corio
carcinoma a cancer of the placenta even
rarer than leukemia choc carcinoma often
grows out of the placental tissue
surrounding an abnormal pregnancy then
metastasizes rapidly and fatally into
the lung and the brain when it occurs
choc carcinoma is thus a double tragedy
an abnormal pregnancy compounded by a
lethal malignancy birth tipped into
death if cancer chemotherapist were
generally considered Outsiders by the
medical community in the
1950s then minu Lee was an outsider even
among Outsiders he had come to the
United States from mton University in
China then spent a brief stint at the
Memorial Hospital in New York in a
scramble to dodge the draft during the
Korean War he had finagled a 2-year
position in herz's service as an
assistant obstetrician he was interested
in research or at least feigned interest
but Lee was considered an intellectual
fugitive unable to commit to any one
question or plan his current plan was to
lie low in Bethesda until the war blew
over but what had started off as a decoy
Fellowship for Lee turn within a single
evening in August 1956 into a full-time
Obsession call late one evening he tried
to medically stabilize a woman with
metastatic choc carcinoma the tumor was
in its Advanced stages and bled so
profusely that the pat patient died in
front of Lee's eyes in 3 hours Lee had
heard of Farber antifolates almost
instinctually he had made a link between
the rapidly dividing leukemia cells in
the bone marrow of the children in
Boston and the rapidly dividing
placental cells in the women in Bethesda
antifolates had never been tried in this
disease but if the drugs could stop
aggressive leukemias from growing even
if temporarily might they not at least
partially relieve the eruptions of choc
carcinoma Lee did not have to to wait
long a few weeks after the first case
another patient a young woman called
Ethel Longoria was just as terrifyingly
ill as the first patient her tumors
growing in grapelike clusters in her
lungs had begun to bleed into the
Linings of her lungs so fast that it had
become nearly impossible to keep up with
the blood loss she was bleeding so
rapidly a hematologist recalled that we
thought we might transfuse her back with
her own blood
so the doctors scrambled around and set
up tubes to collect the blood that she
had bled and put it right back into her
like an internal pump the solution bore
the quintessential Mark of the NCI
transfusing a person with blood leaking
out from her own tumor would have been
considered extraordinary even repulsive
elsewhere but at the NCI this strategy
any strategy was par for the course they
stabilized her and then started
antifolates after the first dose when
the doctors left for the night they
didn't expect that they'd find her in
rounds the next morning at the NCI you
didn't expect you just waited and
watched and took surprises as they came
Ethel Longoria hung on at rounds the
next morning she was still alive
breathing slowly but deeply the bleeding
had now Abed to the point that a few
more doses could be tried at the end of
four rounds of chemotherapy Lee and her
expected to see minor changes in the
size of the tumors what they found
instead left them
flabbergasted the tumor masses
disappeared the chest x-ray improved and
the patient looked normal frech wrote
the level of
choriogonadotropin the hormone secreted
by the cancer cells rapidly plummeted
toward zero the tumors had actually
vanished no one had ever seen such a
response the x-rays thought to have been
mixed up were sent down for
reexamination the response was real a
metastatic solid cancer had vanished
with chemotherapy jubilant Lee and Herz
rushed to publish their findings but
there was a glitch in all this in
observation so minor that it could
easily have been brushed away Chio
carcinoma cells secret a marker a
hormone called chog gonadotropin A
protein that can be measured with an
extremely sensitive test in the blood a
iant of this test is used to detect
pregnancies early in his experiments Lee
had decided that he would use that
hormone level to track the course of the
cancer as it responded to Methotrexate
the HCG level as it was called would be
a surrogate for the cancer its
fingerprint in the blood the trouble was
at the end of the scheduled chemotherapy
the HCG level had fallen to an almost
negligible value but to Lee's annoyance
it hadn't gone all the way to normal he
measured and remeasured it in his
laboratory weekly but it persisted a
pipsqueak of a number that wouldn't go
away Lee became progressively obsessed
with the number the hormone in the blood
he reasoned was the fingerprint of
cancer and if it was still present then
the cancer had to be present too hiding
in the body somewhere even if the
visible tumors had disappeared so
despite every other indication that the
tumors had vanished Lee reasoned that
his patients had not been fully cured
in the end he seemed almost to be
treating a number rather than a patient
ignoring the added toxicity of
additional rounds of the drug Lee
doggedly administered dose upon dose
until at last the HCG level sank to zero
when the institutional board at the NCI
got wind of Lee's decision it responded
with Fury these patients were women who
had supposedly been cured of cancer
their tumors were invisible and giving
them additional ch therapy was
tantamount to poisoning them with
unpredictable doses of Highly toxic
drugs Lee was already known to be a
renegade an iconic this time the NCI
felt he had gone too far in mid July the
board summoned him to a meeting and
promptly fired him Lee was accused of
experimenting on people frech said but
of course all of us were experimenting
Tom Frey and Zub and the rest of them we
were all experiment MERS to not
experiment would mean to follow the old
rules to do absolutely nothing Lee
wasn't prepared to sit back and watch
and do nothing so he was fired for
acting on his convictions for doing
something free Reich and Lee had been
medical residents together in Chicago at
the NCI they had developed a kinship as
two outcasts when frech heard about
Lee's dismissal he immediately went over
to Lee's house to console him but Lee
was inconsolable in a few months he
huffed off to New York bound back for
Memorial Sloan kering he never returned
to the NCI but the story had a final
plot twist as Le had predicted with
several additional doses of Methotrexate
the hormone level that he had so
compulsively trailed did finally vanish
to zero his patients finished their
additional cycles of chemotherapy then
slowly a pattern began to emerge while
the patients who had stopped the drug
early inevitably relapsed with cancer
the patients treated on Le protocol
remained free of disease even months
after the methat trate had been stopped
Lee had stumbled on a deep and
fundamental principle of
oncology cancer needed to be
systemically treated long after every
visible sign of it had vanished the HCG
level the hormone secreted by corio
carcinoma had turned out to be its real
fingerprint its marker in the decades
that follow followed trial after trial
would prove this principle but in 1960
oncology was not yet ready for this
proposal not until several years later
did it strike the board that had fired
Lee so hastily that the patients he had
treated with the prolonged maintenance
strategy would never relapse this
strategy which cost mchu Lee his job
resulted in the first chemotherapeutic
cure of cancer in adults Mice and Men a
model is a lie that helps you see the
truth
Min Le's experience with corio carcinoma
was a philosophical nudge for free and
Freer Reich clinical research is a
matter of urgency Freer Reich argued for
a child with leukemia even a week's
delay meant the difference between life
and death the academic stogy of the
leukemia Consortium its insistence on
progressively and systematically testing
one drug combination after another was
now driving frerich progressively and
statically mad to test three drugs the
group insisted on testing all of the
three possible combinations and then
you've got to do all of the four
combinations and with different Doses
and schedules for each at the rate that
the leukemia Consortium was moving he
argued it would take dozens of years
before any significant advance in
leukemia was made the wards were filling
up with these terribly sick children a
boy or girl might be brought in with a
white cell count of 300 and be dead
overnight
I was the one sent the next morning to
speak with the parents try explaining
zuber's strategy of sequential
systematic and objective trials to a
woman whose daughter has just slumped
into a coma and died frech recalled the
permutations of possible drugs and dozes
were further increased when yet another
new anti-cancer agent was introduced at
the clinical Center in 1960 the newcomer
Vin Christine was a poisonous plant
alkaloid that came from the m NASCAR
perwinkle a small weed-like creeper with
Violet flowers and an entwined coiled
stem the name Vin Christine comes from
vinka the Latin word for bind Vin
Christine had been discovered in 1958 at
the Eli Lily company through a drug
Discovery program that involved grinding
up thousands of pounds of plant material
and testing the extracts in various
biological essays although originally
intended as an anti-diabetic
vincristine at small doses was found to
kill leukemia cells rapidly growing
cells such as those of leukemia
typically create a skeletal scaffold of
proteins called microtubules that allows
two daughter cells to separate from each
other and thereby complete cell division
Vin Christine works by binding to the
end of these microtubules and then
paralyzing the cellular skeleton in its
grip thus quite literally evoking the
Latin word after which it was was
originally named with vin Christine
added to the pharmacopia leukemia
researchers found themselves facing the
Paradox of excess how might one take
four independently active drugs
Methotrexate prednizone 6mp and Vin
Christine and Stitch them together into
an effective regimen and since each drug
was potentially severely toxic could one
ever find a combination that would kill
the leukemia but not kill a child Two
drugs had already spawned dozens of
possibilities with four drugs the
leukemia Consortium would take not 50
but 150 years to finish its trials David
Nathan then a new recruit at the NCI
recalled the near standstill created by
the Avalanche of new medicines free and
fre Reich were simply taking drugs that
were available and adding them together
in combinations the possible
combinations Doses and schedules of four
or five drugs were infinite researchers
could work for years on finding the
right combination of drugs and schedule
zub's sequential systematic objective
trials had reached an impath what was
needed was quite the opposite of a
systematic approach an intuitive and
inspired leap of faith into the deadly
abyss of deadly drugs a scientist from
Alabama Howard Skipper a scholarly
softspoken man who liked to call himself
a mouse doctor provided free and Freer
Reich away out of the impass skipper was
an outsider to the NCI if leukemia was a
a model form of cancer then Skipper had
been studying the Disease by
artificially inducing leukemias in
animals in effect by building a model of
a model Skipper model used a mouse cell
line called
l1210 a lymphoid leukemia that could be
grown in a Petri dish when laboratory
mice were injected with these cells they
would acquire the leukemia a process
known as engraftment because it was Ain
to transferring a piece of normal tissue
a graft from one animal to another
Skipper like to think about cancer not
as a disease but as an abstract
mathematical entity in a mouse
transplanted with l1210 cells the cells
divided with nearly obscene facundity
often twice a day a rate startling even
for cancer cells a single leukemia cell
and grafted into the mouse could thus
take off in a terrifying Arc of numbers
1 4 16 64
1,24
4,096
[Music]
16,384
65,536
262,144
1,
48576 and so forth all the way to
Infinity in 16 or 17 days more than 2
billion daughter cells could grow out of
that single cell more than the entire
number of blood cells in the mouse
Skipper learned that he could halt this
effusive cell div Vision by
administering chemotherapy to the
leukemia engrafted Mouse by charting the
life and death of leukemia cells as they
responded to drugs in these mice Skipper
emerged with two pivotal findings first
he found that chemotherapy typically
killed a fixed percentage of cells at
any given instance no matter what the
total number of cancer cells was this
percentage was a unique Cardinal number
particular to every drug in other words
if you started off with 100,000 leukemia
cells in a mouse and administered a drug
that killed 99% of those cells in a
single round then every round would kill
cells in a fractional manner resulting
in fewer and fewer cells after every
round of chemotherapy 100,000 1,000 10
and so forth until the number finally
fell to zero after four rounds killing
leukemia was an iterative process like
having a monster's body then having the
half and having the remnant half second
Skipper found that by adding drugs in
combination he could often get
synergistic effects on killing since
different drugs elicited different
resistance mechanisms and produced
different toxicities in cancer cells
using drugs in concert dramatically
lowered the chance of resistance and
increased cell killing two drugs were
therefore typically better than one and
three drugs better than two with several
drugs and several iterative rounds of
chemotherapy in Rapid Fire succession
skipper cured leukemias in his Mouse
model for free and free Reich Skipper
observations had an inevitable if
frightening conclusion if human
leukemias were like Skippers Mouse
leukemias then children would need to be
treated with a regimen containing not
one or two but multiple drugs
furthermore a single treatment would not
suffice maximal intermittent intensive
upfront chemotherapy would need to be
administered with nearly ruthless
inexorable persistence
dose after dose after dose after dose
pushing the outermost limits of
tolerability there would be no stopping
not even after the leukemia cells had
apparently disappeared in the blood and
the children had apparently been cured
Freer reik and free were now ready to
take their pivotal and intuitive leap
into the abyss the next regimen they
would try would be a combination of all
four drugs Vin Christine amethopterin
mercaptopurine and PR own the regimen
would be known by a new acronym with
each letter standing for one of the
drugs Vamp the name had many intended
and unintended resonances Vamp is a word
that means to improvise or patch up to
Cobble something together from bits and
pieces that might crumble apart any
second can mean a seductress one who
promises but does not deliver it also
refers to the front of a boot the part
that carries the full brunt of force
during a kick Vamp doctors are men who
prescribe medicines of which they know
little to cure diseases of which they
know Less in human beings of whom they
know nothing voler if we didn't kill the
tumor we killed the patient William
Maloney on the early days of
chemotherapy VMP high do
life-threatening four drug combination
therapy for leukemia might have made
obvious sense to Skipper free and
frerich but to many of their colleagues
it was a terrifying notion Abomination
frech finally approached Zuber with his
idea I wanted to treat them with full
doses of Vin Christine and amethopterin
combined with the 6mp and prednizone the
ANS in the sentence were italicized to
catch zuber's attention Zuber was
stunned it is the dose that makes a
poison runs the old adage in medicine
all medicines were poisons in one form
or another merely diluted to an
appropriate dose but chemotherapy was
poison even at the correct dose a child
with leukemia was already stretched to
the brutal limits of survival Hanging On
To Life by a bare physiological thread
people at the NCI would often casually
talk of chemotherapy as the poison of
the month if four poisons of the month
were simultaneously pumped daily into a
3 or six-year-old child there was
virtually no guarantee that he or she
could survive even the first dose of
this regimen let alone survive week
after week after week when free and
frech presented their preliminary plan
for Vamp at a national meeting on blood
cancers the audience boed Farber for one
favored giving one drug at a time and
adding the second only after relapse and
so forth following the leukemia
consortium's slow but steady method of
adding drugs carefully and sequentially
oh boy fre Reich recalled it was a
terrible catastrophic Showdown we were
laughed at and then called insane
incompetent and cruel with limited
patients and hundreds of drugs and
combinations to try every new leukemia
trial had to wind its way through a
complex approval process through the
leukemia group free and Freer Reich it
was felt were making an unauthorized
Quantum Leap the group refused to
sponsor VMP at least not until the many
other trials had been completed but free
wrangled a last minute compromise Vamp
would be studied independently at the
NCI outside the purview of the algb the
idea was Preposterous Freer Reich
recalled to run the trial we would need
to split with the algb the very group
that we had been so instrumental in
founding Zuber wasn't pleased with the
compromise it was a break from his
cherished Cooperative model worse still
if Vamp failed it would be a political
nightmare for him if the children had
died we'd be accused of experimenting on
people at this Federal installation of
the National Cancer Institute fre Reich
acknowledged everyone knew it was chansy
territory embroiled in controversy even
if he had resolved it as best he could
free resigned as the chair of the algb
years later fre Reich acknowledged the
risks involved we could have killed all
of those kids the vamp trial was finally
launched in
1961 almost instantly it seemed seemed
like an abysmal mistake precisely the
sort of nightmare that zuid had been
trying to avoid the first children to be
treated were already terribly terribly
ill Freer Reich recalled we started Vamp
and by the end of the week many of them
were infinitely worse than before it was
a disaster the Ford drug chemo regimen
raged through the body and wiped out all
the normal cells some children slumped
into near coma and were hooked to
respirators Freer
desperate to save them visited his
patients obsessively in their hospital
beds you can imagine the tension he
wrote I could just hear people saying I
Told You So this girl or boy is going to
die he hovered in the wards pestering
the staff with questions and suggestions
his paternal possessive instincts were
aroused these were my kids I really
tried to take care of them the NCI as a
whole watched tensely for its life too
was on the line I did Little Things
frech wrote maybe I could make them more
comfortable give them a little aspirin
lower their temperatures get them a
blanket thrown into the uncertain front
lines of cancer medicine juggling the
most toxic and futuristic combinations
of drugs the NCI doctors fell back to
their oldest principles they provided
Comfort they nurtured they focused on
caregiving and support they fluffed
pillows at the end of three excruciating
weeks a few of Fry's patients somehow
pulled through then unexpectedly at a
time when it was almost unbearable to
look for it there was a payoff the
normal bone marrow cells began to
recover gradually but the leukemia went
into remission the bone marrow biopsies
came back one after another all without
leukemia cells red blood cells and white
blood cells and platelets sprouted up in
an otherwise scorched field of bone
marrow but the leukemia did not return
another set of biopsies Weeks Later
confirmed the finding not a single
leukemia cell was visible under the
microscope this after near complete
Devastation was a remission so deep that
it exceeded the expectations of everyone
at the NCI a few weeks later the NCI
team drummed up enough courage to try
Vamp on yet another small cohort of
patients once again after the nearly
catastrophic dip in counts like a drop
from a cliff with a thread tied to your
ankles as one researcher remembered it
the bone marrow recovered and the
leukemia vanished a few days later the
bone marrow began to regenerate and
frerich performed a hesitant biopsy to
look at the cells the leukemia had
vanished again what it had left behind
was full of Promise normal cobblestones
of blood cells growing back in the
marrow by
1962 free and frich had treated six
patients with several doses of Vamp
remissions were reliable and durable the
clinical Center was now filled with the
familiar chatter of children in wigs and
scarves who had survived two or three
seasons of chemotherapy a strikingly
anomalous phenomenon in the history of
leukemia critics were slowly turning
into converts other clinical centers
around the nation joined free and Fry's
experimental regimen the patient is
amazingly recovered a hematologist in
Boston treating an 11-year-old wrote in
1964 astonishment slowly gave way to
buoyancy even William dameek the
opinionated Harvard trained hematologist
and one of the most prominent early
opponents of Vamp wrote the mood among
pediatric oncologists changed virtually
overnight from one of compassionate
fatalism to one of aggressive optimism
the optimism was potent but shortlived
in September
1963 not long after free and Freer had
returned from one of those triumphant
conferences celebrating the unexpected
success of vamp a few children in
remission came back to the clinic with
minor complaints a headache a seizure an
occasional tingling of a nerve in the
face some of us didn't make much of it
at first a hematologist recalled we
imagined the symptoms would go away but
frech who had studied the spread of
leukemia cells in the body for nearly a
decade knew that these were headaches
that would not go away by October there
were more children back at the clinic
this time with numbness tingling
headaches seizures and facial paralysis
free and frerich were both getting
nervous in the 1880s fko had observed
that leukemia cells could occasionally
colonize the brain to investigate the
possibility of a brain Invasion by
cancer cells free and frerich looked
directly at the spinal fluid using a
spinal tap a method to withdraw a few
milliliters of fluid from the spinal
canal using a thin straight needle the
fluid a straw-colored liquid that
circulates in direct connection with the
brain is a surrogate for examining the
brain in the folklore of science there
is the often told story of the moment of
Discovery the quickening of the pulse
the spectral Luminosity of ordinary
facts the overheated stand still second
when observations crystallize and fall
together into patterns like pieces of a
kaleidoscope the Apple drops from the
tree the man jumps up from a bathtub the
slippery equation balances itself but
there is another moment of Discovery its
antithesis that is rarely recorded the
discovery of failure it is a moment that
a scientist often encounters alone a
patient CT scan shows a relapsed
lymphoma a cell once killed by a drug
begins to grow back a child returns to
the NCI with a headache what free and
frech discovered in the spinal fluid
left them cold leukemia cells were
growing explosively in the spinal fluid
by the millions colonizing the brain the
headaches and the numbness were early
signs of much more profound devastations
to come in the months that followed one
by one all the children came back to the
Institute with a spectrum of
neurological complaints headaches
tingling abstract Speckles of light then
slumped into coma bone marrow biopsies
were clean no cancer was found in the
body but the leukemia cells had invaded
the nervous system causing a quick
unexpected demise it was a consequence
of the body's own defense system
subverting cancer treatment the brain
and spinal cord are insulated by a tight
cellular seal called the bloodb brain
barrier that prevents foreign chemicals
from easily getting into the brain it is
an ancient biological system that has
evolved to keep poisons from reaching
the brain but the same system had likely
also kept Vamp out of the nervous system
creating a natural Sanctuary for cancer
within the body the leukemia sensing an
opportunity in that Sanctuary had
furtively climbed in colonizing the one
place that is fundamentally unreachable
by chemotherapy the children died one
after the other failed by virtue of the
adaptation designed to protect them free
and frech were hit hard by those
relapses for a clinical scientist a
trial is like a child a deeply personal
investment to watch this sort of intense
intimate Enterprise fold up and die is
to suffer the loss of a child one
leukemia doctor wrote I know the
patients I know their brothers and
sisters I know their dogs and cats by
name the pain is that a lot of love
affairs end after seven exhilarating and
intensive trials the love affair at the
NCI had indeed ended the brain relapses
after Vamp seemed seem to push morale at
The Institute to the breaking point free
who had so furiously tried to keep Vamp
alive through its most trying stages 12
months of manipulating coaxing and
weedling now found himself drained of
his last stores of energy even the
indefatigable frech was beginning to
lose steam he felt a growing hostility
from others at the institute at the peak
of his career he too felt tired of the
interminable institutional scuffles that
had once invigorated him in the winter
of
1963 free left for a position at the MD
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston Texas
the trials were temporarily put on hold
although they would eventually be
resurrected in Texas Freer Reich soon
left the NCI to join free in Houston The
Fragile ecosystem that had sustained fre
Reich free and Zuber dissolved in a few
months but the story of leukemia the
story of cancer isn't the story of
doctors who struggle and survive moving
from one institution to another it is
the story of patients who struggle and
survive moving from one embankment of
illness to another resilience
inventiveness and survivorship qualities
often ascribed to Great Physicians are
reflected quality
emanating first from those who struggle
with illness and only then mirrored by
those who treat them if the history of
medicine is told through the stories of
doctors it is because their
contributions stand in place of the more
substantive heroism of their patients I
said that all the children had relapsed
and died but this is not quite true a
few a small handful for mysterious
reasons never relapsed with leukemia in
the central nervous system at the NCI
and the few other hospitals brave enough
to try Vamp about 5% of the treated
children finished their year-long
Journey they remained in remission not
just for weeks or months but for years
they came back year after year and sat
nervously in Waiting rooms at trial
centers all around the nation their
voices deepened their hair grew back
biopsy after biopsy was performed and
there was no visible sign of Cancer on a
summer afternoon I drove through Western
Maine to the small town of Waterboro
against the foggy overcast Sky the
landscape was spectacular with ancient
Pine and Birch forests tipping into
crystallin lakes on the far edge of the
town I turned onto a dirt road leading
away from the water at the end of the
road surrounded by Deep Pine forests was
a tiny clabbered house a 56-year-old
woman in a blue t-shirt answered the
door it had taken me 17 months and
innumerable phone calls questions
interviews and references to track her
down one afternoon scouring the internet
I had found a lead I remember dialing
the number excited beyond words and
waiting for interminable Rings before a
woman answered I had fixed up an
appointment to meet her that week and
driven rather recklessly to M to keep it
when I arrived I realized that I was 20
minutes early I cannot remember what I
said or struggled to say as a measure of
introduction but I felt a struck
standing before me against the door
smiling nervously was one of the
survivors of that original Vamp cohort
cured of childhood leukemia the basement
was flooded and the couch was growing
mildew so we sat outdoors in the shadows
of the trees in a screened tent with
deer flies and mosquitoes buzzing
outside the woman Ella I'll call her had
collected a pile of medical records and
photographs for me to look through as
she handed them over I sensed a shiver
running through her body as if even
today 45 years after her ordeal the
memory haunts her viscerally Ella was
diagnosed with leukemia in June
1964 about 18 months after Vamp was
first used at the NCI she was 11 years
old in the photographs taken before Her
diagnosis she was a typical pretin with
bangs and braces in the photograph taken
just 6 months later after chemotherapy
she was transformed bald sheet white
from anemia and severely underweight
collapsed on a wheelchair and unable to
walk Ella was treated with Vamp her
oncologists in Boston having heard of
the spectacular responses at the NCI had
rather bravely chosen to treat her off
trial with the for drug regimen it had
seemed like like a cataclysm at first
the high doses of vincristine caused
such severe collateral nerve damage that
she was left with a permanent burning
sensation in her legs and fingers
prazone made her Delirious the nurses
unable to deal with a strong W deranged
pretin wandering through the corridors
of the hospital screaming and howling at
night restrained her by tying her arms
with ropes to the bed posts confined to
her bed she often crouched in a fetal
position
her muscles wasting away the neuropathy
worsening at 12 years of age she became
addicted to morine which was prescribed
for her pain she detoxed herself by
sheer force of will she said by lasting
it out through the spasms of withdrawal
her lower lip is still bruised from the
time she bit herself in those awful
months while waiting out the hour for
the next dose of morphine yet remarkably
the main thing she remembers is the
overwhelming feeling of being spared I
feel as if I slipped through she told me
arranging the records back into their
envelopes she looked away as if to sweat
an imaginary fly and I could see her
eyes welling up with tears she had met
several other children with leukemia in
the hospital Wards none had survived I
don't know why I deserve the illness in
the first place but then I don't know
why I deserve to be cured
leukemia is like that it mystifies you
it changes your life my mind briefly
flashed to the chera mommy to atasa to
halstead's young woman awaiting her
mastectomy Sydney Farber never met Ella
but he encountered patients just like
her long-term survivors of Vamp in 1964
the year that Ella began her
chemotherapy he triumphantly brought
photographs of a few such patients to
Washington as a sort of showand tell for
Congress
living proof that chemotherapy could
cure cancer the path was now becoming
increasingly clear to him cancer
research needed an additional thrust
more money more research more publicity
and a directed trajectory toward a cure
his testimony before Congress thus
acquired a nearly devotional Messianic
fervor after the photographs and his
testimony one Observer recalled any
further proof was anticlimactic and unne
necessary Farber was now ready to LEAP
out from the realm of leukemia into the
vastly more common real cancers we are
attempting to develop chemicals which
might affect otherwise incurable tumors
of the breast the ovary the uterus the
lung the kidney the intestine and highly
malignant tumors of the skin such as the
black cancer or melanoma he wrote The
Cure of even one such solid cancer in
adults Farber new would singularly
revolutionize oncology it would provide
the most concrete proof Pro that this
was a winnable War since most of the
early anti-cancer drugs were cytotoxic
cell killing the threshold between a
therapeutic cancer killing dose and a
toxic dose was extremely narrow many of
the drugs had to be very carefully dosed
to avoid the unwarranted but
inextricably linked toxicity an
anatomists tumor it took plain old
courage to be a chemotherapist in the
1960s and certainly the courage of the
conviction that cancer would eventually
succumb to drugs Vincent
National Cancer Institute investigator
and eventually NCI director on a chilly
February morning in 2004 a 24-year-old
athlete Ben Orman discovered a lump in
his neck he was in his apartment reading
the newspaper when running his hand
absent-mindedly past his face his
fingers brushed against a small swelling
the lump was about the size of a small
dried grape if he took a deep breath he
could swallow it back into the cavity of
his chest he dismissed it it was a lump
he reasoned and athletes were used to
lumps calluses swollen knees boils bumps
bruises coming and going with no
remembered cause he returned to his
newspaper and worry vanished from his
mind the lump in his neck whatever it
was would doubtless vanish in time as
well but it grew instead imperceptibly
at first then more assertively turning
from grape size to prune size in about a
month he could feel it on the shallow
dip of his collar bone worried Orman
went to the walk-in clinic of the
hospital almost apologetic about his
complaints the triage nurse scribbled in
her notes lump in his neck and added a
question mark at the end of the sentence
with that sentence Orman entered the
unfamiliar world of oncology swallowed
like his own lump into the bizarre
cavitary Universe of cancer the doors of
the hospital opened and closed behind
him a doctor in a blue scrub suit
stepped through the curtains and ran her
hands up and down his neck he had blood
tests and x-rays in Rapid succession
followed by CT scans and more
examinations the scans revealed that the
lump in the neck was merely the tip of a
much deeper Iceberg of lumps beneath
that Sentinel Mass a chain of masses
coiled from his neck down into his chest
culminating in a fist-sized tumor just
behind his sternum large masses located
in the anterior chest as medical
students learn come in four T's almost
like a maob nursery rhyme for cancer
thyroid cancer thymoma teratoma and
terrible lymphoma ormon problem given
his age and the matted dense appearance
of the lumps was almost certainly the
last of these a lymphoma cancer of the
lymph glands I saw Ben Orman nearly two
months after that visit to the hospital
he was sitting in the waiting room
reading a book he read fiercely
athletically almost competitively often
finishing one novel a week as if in a
race in the 8 weeks since his ER visit
he had undergone a pet scan a visit with
a surgeon and a biopsy of the neck lump
as suspected the mass was a lymphoma a
relatively rare variant called hins
disease more news followed the scans
revealed that orman's cancer was
confined entirely to one side of his
upper torso and he had none of the
ghostly be symptoms weight loss fever
chills or night sweats that occasionally
accompany Hotchkins disease in a staging
system that ran from I to four with an A
or B added to denote the absence or
presence of the occult symptoms he fell
into Stage I a relatively early in the
progression of the disease it was somber
news but of all the patients shuttling
in and out of the waiting room that
morning Orman arguably carried the most
benign prognosis with an intensive
course of chemotherapy it was more than
likely 85% likely that he would be cured
by intensive I told him I mean several
months perhaps even stretching out to
half a year the drugs will be given in
cycles and there will have to be visits
in between to check blood counts every 3
weeks just as his counts recovered the
whole cycle would begin all over again
Copus on chemotherapy he would lose his
hair with the first cycle he would
almost certainly become permanently
infertile there might be
life-threatening infections during the
times when his white counts would bottom
out nearly to zero most ominously the
chemo might cause a second cancer in the
future he nodded I watched the thought
pick up velocity in his brain until it
had reached its full impact it's going
to be a long haul a marathon I stammered
apologetically groping for an analogy
but we'll get to the end he nodded again
silently as if he already knew on a
Wednesday morning not long after my
meeting with Orman I took a shuttle
across Boston to see my patients at the
Dana Farber Cancer Institute most of us
called The Institute simply the Farber
large already in life
Sydney Farber had become even larger in
death the aonomus Farber was now a
sprawling 16-story Labyrinth of concrete
crammed full of scientists and
Physicians a comprehensive labc Clinic
come Pharmacy c chemotherapy unit there
were
2934 employees dozens of conference
rooms scores of Laboratories a laundry
unit for banks of elevators and multiple
libraries the site of the original
basement lab had long been dwarf by the
massive complex of buildings around it
like a vast overbuilt and overwrought
medieval Temple the Farber had long
swallowed its Shrine as you entered the
new building an oil painting of the man
himself with his characteristic half
scowling half smiling face stared back
at you in the foyer little bits and
pieces of him it seemed were stwn
everywhere the corridor on the way to
the fellow's office was still hung with
the cartoonish portraits that he had
once commissioned for the Jimmy fund
Snow White Pinocchio Jiminy Cricket
Dumbo the bone marrow needles with which
we performed our biopsies looked and
felt as if they came from another age
perhaps they had been sharpened by
Farber or one of his trainees 50 years
ago wandering through these labs and
Clinics you often felt as if you could
stumble onto cancer history at any
minute one morning I did bolting to
catch the elevator I ran headlong into
an old man in a wheelchair whom I first
took to be a patient it was Tom free a
professor ameritus now heading up to his
office on the 16th floor my patient that
Wednesday morning was a 76-year-old
woman named beatric senson be as she
liked to be called reminded me of one of
those tiny insects or animals that you
read about in Natural History textbooks
that can carry 10 times their weight or
leap five times their height she was
almost preternaturally minuscule about
85 lb and 4 and 1/2 ft tall with
bird-like features and delicate bones
that seemed to hang together like Twigs
in Winter to this diminutive frame
however she brought a fierce force of
personality the lightness of body
counterbalanced by the heftiness of Soul
she had been a marine and served in two
Wars even as I towered over her on the
examination table I felt awkward and
humbled as if she were towering over me
in spirit Sorenson had pancreatic cancer
the tumor had been discovered almost
Accidentally In the late summer of
2003 when she had had a bout of
abdominal pain and diarrhea and a CT
scan had picked up a 4 cm solid nodule
hanging off the tail of her pancreas in
retrospect the diarrhea may have been
unrelated a brave surgeon had attempted
to resect it but the margins of the
reection still contain some tumor cells
even in on ology a dismal discipline to
begin with the sun resected pancreatic
cancer was considered the epitome of the
Dismal Sorenson's life had turned upside
down I want to beat it to the end she
had told me at first we had tried
through the early fall we blasted her
pancreas with radiation to kill the
tumor cells Then followed with
chemotherapy using the drug five fuo
urasil the tumor had grown right through
all the treatments
in the winter we had switched to a new
drug called gem cabine or Gemar the
tumor cells had Shrugged the new drug
off instead mockingly sending a shower
of painful metastases into her liver at
times it felt as if we would have been
better off with no drugs at all Sorenson
was at the clinic that morning to see if
we could offer anything else she wore
white pants and a white shirt her paper
thin skin was marked with dry lines she
may have been crying
but her face was a cipher that I could
not read she will try anything anything
her husband pleaded she is stronger than
she looks but strong or not there was
nothing left to try I stared down at my
feet unable to confront the obvious
questions the attending physician
shifted uncomfortably in his chair
beatric finally broke the awkward
silence I'm sorry she Shrugged her
shoulders and looked vacantly past us I
know we have reached an end we hung our
heads ashamed it was I suspected not the
first time that a patient had consoled a
doctor about the ineffectuality of his
discipline two lumps seen on two
different Ms two vastly different
incarnations of cancer one almost
certainly curable the second an
inevitable spiral into death it felt
nearly 2500 years after hypocrates had
naively coined the overarching term
Carinos that modern oncology was hardly
any more sophisticated in its taxonomy
of cancer orman's lymphoma and
Sorenson's pancreatic cancer were both
of course cancers malignant
proliferations of cells but the diseases
could not have been further apart in
their trajectories and personalities
even referring to them by the same name
cancer felt like some sort of medical
anacronismo
to describe anything from a stroke to a
hemorrhage to a seizure like hypocrates
it was as if we too had naively lumped
the lumps but naive or not it was this
lumping this emphatic unshakable faith
in the underlying Singularity of cancer
more than its pluralities that
galvanized the lascarides in the 1960s
oncology was on a quest for cohesive
truths a universal cure as Farber put it
in
1962 and if the oncologists of the 19
60s imagined a common cure for all forms
of cancer it was because they imagined a
common disease called cancer curing one
form the belief ran would inevitably
lead to the Cure of another and so forth
like a chain reaction until the whole
malignant edifice had crumbled like a
set of dominoes that assumption that a
monolithic Hammer would eventually
demolish a monolithic disease surcharged
Physicians scientists and cancer
lobbyists with vitality and energy
energy for the lascarides it was an
organizing principle a matter of Faith
the only certain Beacon toward which
they all gravitated indeed the political
consolidation of cancer that the lasit
sought in Washington a single Institute
a single source of funds led by a single
physician or scientist relied on a
deeper notion of a medical consolidation
of cancer into a single disease a
monolith a single Central narrative
without this Grand embracing narrative
neither Mary Lasker nor Sydney Farber
could have envisioned a systematic
targeted War the illness that had
brought Ben Orman to the clinic late
that evening Hodgkins lymphoma was
itself announced late to the world of
cancer its Discoverer Thomas hodkin was
a thin short 19th century English
anatomist with a spade likee beard and
an astonishingly curved nose character
who might have walked out of an Edward
Lear poem hodkin was born in 1798 to a
quake family in Pentonville a small
Hamlet outside London a precocious child
he grew quickly into an even more
precocious young man whose interests
sloped freely from geology to
mathematics to chemistry he apprenticed
briefly as a geologist then as an
apothecary and finally graduated from
the University of Edinburgh with a
degree in medicine a chance event
enticed hodkin into the world of
pathological anatomy and led him toward
the disease that would bear his name in
1825 a struggle within the faculty of St
Thomas and gu Hospital in London broke
up the venerable institution into two
bickering halves gu hospital and its new
rival St Thomas this divorce like many
marital spats was almost immediately
followed by a vicious argument over the
partition of property the property here
was a maab Ensemble the precious
anatomical collection of the hospital
brains heart Hearts stomachs and
skeletons in pickling jars of formalin
that had been hoarded for use as
teaching tools for the hospital's
medical students St Thomas Hospital
refused to part with its precious
specimens so guys scrambled to Cobble
together its own anatomical Museum
hodkin had just returned from his second
visit to Paris where he had learned to
prepare and dissect kadavi specimens he
was promptly recruited to collect
specimens for Guy's new Museum the job's
most inventive academic perk perhaps was
his new title the curator of the museum
and the inspector of the Dead hodkin
proved to be an extraordinary inspector
of the Dead a compulsive anatomical
curator who hoarded hundreds of samples
within a few years but collecting
specimens was a rather mundane task
Hodgkins particular genius lay in
organizing them he became a librarian as
much as a pathologist he devised his own
systematics for pathology the original
building that housed his collection has
been destroyed but the new Museum where
hodkin original specimens are still on
display is a strange Marvel a four
chambered Atrium located deep inside a
larger building it is an enormous
walk-in casket of Wonders constructed of
rot iron and glass you enter a door and
Ascend a staircase then find yourself on
the top floor of a series of galleries
that Cascade downward along every wall
are rows of formal and fill jars lungs
in one Gallery hearts in another brains
kidneys bones and so forth this method
of organizing pathological Anatomy by
organ system rather than by date or
disease was a revelation by thus
inhabiting the body conceptually by
climbing in and out of the body at will
often noting the correlations between
organs and systems hodkin found that he
could recognize patterns within patterns
instinctually sometimes without even
consciously registering them in the
early winter of 1832 hodkin announced
that he had collected a series of cavers
mostly of young men who possessed a
strange systemic disease the illness was
characterized as he put it by A peculiar
enlargement of lymph glands to the
undeserving eye this enlargement could
easily have been from tuberculosis or
syphilis the more common sources of
glandular swelling at that time time but
hodkin was convinced that he had
encountered an entirely new disease an
unknown pathology unique to these young
men he wrote up the case of seven such
cavers and had his paper on some morbid
appearances of the absorbent glands and
spleen presented to the medical and
chirurgical Society the story of a
compulsive young doctor putting old
swellings into new pathological bottles
was received without much enthusiasm
only eight members of the Society
reportedly attended the lecture they
filed out afterward in silence not even
bothering to record their names on the
dusty attendance roster hodkin too was a
little embarrassed by his Discovery a
pathological paper May perhaps be
thought of little value if unaccompanied
by suggestions designed to assist in the
treatment either Curative or pallative
he wrote merely describing an illness
without offering any therapeutic
suggestions
seemed like an empty academic exercise
to him a form of intellectual frittering
soon after publishing his paper he began
to drift away from medicine altogether
in 1837 after a rather vicious political
spat with his superiors he resigned his
post at guys he had a brief stint at St
Thomas Hospital as its curator a rebound
Affair that was doomed to fail in 1844
he gave up his academic practice ice
altogether his anatomical studies slowly
came to a halt in 1898 some 30 years
after hodkin death an Austrian
pathologist Carl Sternberg was looking
through a microscope at a patient's
glands when he found a peculiar series
of cells staring back at him giant
disorganized cells with cleaved biobed
nuclei owl's eyes as he described them
glaring sullenly out from the forests of
lymph Hotchkins Anatomy had reached its
final cellular resolution these alzy
cells were malignant lymphocytes lymph
cells that had turned cancerous
Hotchkins disease was a cancer of the
lymph glands a lymphoma hotchkin may
have been disappointed by what he
thought was only a descriptive study of
his disease but he had underestimated
the value of careful observation by
compulsively studying Anatomy alone he
had stumbled upon the most critical
Revelation about this form of lymphoma
Hodgkins disease Had A peculiar
propensity of infiltrating lymph nodes
locally one by one other cancers could
be more unpredictable more capricious as
one oncologist put it lung cancer for
instance might start as a spicular
nodule in the lung then UNM itself and
ambulate unexpectedly into the brain
pancreatic cancer was notoriously known
to send sprays of malignant cells into
farway sites such as the bones and the
liver but Hotchkins and anatomist
Discovery was anatomically differential
it moved as if with a measured ordered
Pace from one contiguous node to another
from gland to gland and from region to
region it was this propensity to spread
locally from one node to the next that
poised Hodgkins uniquely in the history
of cancer Hodgkins disease was yet
another hybrid among malignant diseases
if farber's leukemia had occupied the
hazy border between liquid and solid
tumors then hodkin disease inhabited yet
another strange Borderland a local
disease on the verge of transforming
into a systemic One holsteads Vision of
cancer on its way to becoming galin in
the early 1950s at a cocktail party in
California Henry Kaplan a professor of
radiology at Stanford overheard a
conversation about the plan to build a
linear accelerator for use by physicists
at Stanford a linear accelerator is an
x-ray tube taken to an extreme form like
a conventional x-ray tube a linear
accelerator also fires electrons onto a
Target to generate high-intensity x-rays
unlike a conventional tube however the
linac imbus massive amounts of energy
into the electrons pushing them to
dizzying velocities before smashing them
against the metal surface the X rays
that emerge from this are deeply
penetrating powerful enough not only to
pass through tissue but to scald cells
to death
Kaplan had trained at the NCI where he
had learned to use x-rays to treat
leukemia in animals but his interest had
gradually shifted to solid tumors in
humans lung cancer breast cancer
lymphomas solid tumors could be treated
with radiation he knew but the outer
shell of the cancer like its aonomus
crabs carpas needed to be penetrated
deeply to kill cancer cells a linear
accelerator with its sharp dense knif
likee beam might allow him to reach
tumor cells buried deep inside tissues
in 1953 he persuaded a team of
physicists and engineers at Stanford to
tailor make an accelerator exclusively
for the hospital the accelerator was
installed in a vault-like warehouse in
San Francisco in
1956 dodging traffic between Filmore
Street and Mission Hill Kaplan
personally wheeled in its colossal block
of lead shielding on an automobile Jack
borrowed from a neighboring garage owner
through a minuscule pinhole in that lead
block he could now direct tiny
controlled dozes of a furiously potent
beam of x-rays millions of electron
volts of energy in concentrated bursts
to lanate any cancer cell to death but
what form of cancer if Kaplan had
learned one lesson at the NCI it was
that by focusing microscopically on a
single disease one could extrapolate
into the entire universe of diseases the
characteristics that Kaplan sought in
his Target were relatively well defined
since the linac could only focus its
killer beam on local sites it would have
to be a local not a systemic cancer
leukemia was out of the question breast
and lung cancer were important targets
but both were unpredictable Mercurial
diseases with propensities for occult
and systemic spread the powerful Oculus
of kaplan's intellect swiveling about
through the malignant World ultimately
landed on the most natural target for
his investigation Hodgkins disease Henry
Kaplan was Hodgkins disease George
canelo's a former senior clinician at
the NCI told me leaning back in his
chair we were sitting in his office
while he rummaged through piles of
manuscripts monographs articles books
cataloges and papers pulling out
occasional pictures of Kaplan from his
files here was Kaplan dressed in a bow
tie looking at sheaves of paper ERS at
the NCI or Kaplan in a white coat
standing next to the linac at Stanford
its 5 million volt probe just inches
from his nose Kaplan wasn't the first
doctor to treat Hodgkins with x-rays but
he was certainly the most dogged the
most methodical and the most
single-minded in the mid 1930s a Swiss
radiologist named Renee Gilbert had
shown that the swollen lymph nodes of
Hotchkins disease could effectively and
dramatically be reduced with radiation
but Gilbert patients had typically
relapsed after treatment often in the
lymph nodes immediately contiguous to
the original radiated area at the
Toronto General Hospital a Canadian
surgeon named Vera Peters had furthered
Gilbert's Studies by broadening the
radiation field even farther delivering
x-rays not to a single swollen node but
to an entire area of lymph nodes Peters
called her strategy extended field
radiation in
1958 analyzing the cohort of patients
that she had treated Peters observed
that Broadfield radiation could
significantly improve long-term survival
for early stage Hotchkins patients but
peters's data was retrospective based on
the historical analysis of Prior treated
patients what Peters needed was a more
rigorous medical experiment a randomized
clinical trial historical series can be
biased by doctors highly selective
choices of patients for therapy or by
their counting only the ones that do the
best
independently of Peters Kaplan had also
realized that extended field radiation
could improve relapse-free survival
perhaps even cure early stage Hotchkins
disease but he lacked formal proof in
1962 challenged by one of his students
Henry Kaplan set out to prove the point
the trials that Kaplan designed still
rank among the classics of study design
in the first set called the L1 trials he
assigned equal numbers of patients to to
either extended field radiation or to
limited involved field radiation and
plotted relapse-free survival curves the
answer was definitive extended field
radiation meticulous radiotherapy as one
doctor described it drastically
diminished the relapse rate of hodkin's
disease but Kaplan knew that a
diminished relapse rate was not a cure
so he delved further 2 years later the
Stanford team carved out a larger field
of radiation involving nodes around the
aorta the large arch-shaped blood vessel
that leads out of the heart here they
introduced an innovation that would
prove pivotal to their success Kaplan
knew that only patients that had
localized Hodgkins disease could
possibly benefit from radiation therapy
to truly test the efficacy of radiation
therapy then Kaplan realized that he
would need a strictly limited cohort of
patients whose Hodgkins disease involved
just a few contiguous lymph nodes to
exclude patients with more disseminated
forms of lymphoma Kaplan devised an
intense battery of tests to Stage his
patients there were blood tests a
detailed clinical exam a procedure
called
lymphangiography A Primitive ancestor of
a CT scan for the lymph nodes and a bone
marrow biopsy even so Kaplan was
unsatisfied doubly careful he began to
perform exploratory abdominal surgery
and biopsy internal nodes to ensure that
only patients with locally confined
disease were entering his trials the
doses of radiation were now daringly
high but gratifyingly the responses
soared as well Kaplan documented even
greater relapse-free intervals now
stretching out into dozens of months
then years when the first batch of
patients had survived 5 years without
relapses he began to speculate that some
may have been cured by extended field
x-rays kaplan's experimental idea had
finally made its way out of a San
Francisco Warehouse into the mainstream
clinical world but hadn't holstead
wagered on the same horse and lost
hadn't radical surgery become entangled
in the same logic carving out larger and
larger areas for treatment and then
spiral downward why did Kaplan succeed
where others had failed first because
Kaplan meticulously restricted radio
therapy to patients with early stage
disease he went to exhaustive lengths to
stage patients before unleashing
radiation on them by strictly narrowing
the group of patients treated Kaplan
markedly increased the likelihood of his
success and second he succeeded because
he had picked the right disease Hodgkins
was for the most part a regional illness
fundamental to all attempts at Curative
treatment of Hotchkins disease One
reviewer commented memorably in the New
England Journal of Medicine in
1968 is the assumption that in the
significant fraction of of cases the
disease is localized Kaplan treated the
intrinsic biology of hodkin's disease
with utmost seriousness if hodkin
lymphoma had been more capricious in its
movement through the body and occult
areas of spread more common as in some
forms of breast cancer then kaplan's
staging strategy for all his
excruciatingly detailed workups would
inherently have been doomed to fail
instead of trying to tailor the disease
to fit his medicine Kaplan learned to
tailor his medicine to fit the right
disease this simple principle the
meticulous matching of a particular
therapy to a particular form and stage
of cancer would eventually be given its
due Merit in cancer therapy early stage
local cancers Kaplan realized were often
inherently different from widely spread
metastatic cancers even within the same
form of cancer a 100 instances of
Hodgkins disease even though
pathologically classified as the same
entity were a 100 variants around a
common theme cancers possessed
temperaments personalities behaviors and
biological heterogeneity demanded
therapeutic heterogeneity the same
treatment could not indiscriminately be
applied to all but even if Kaplan
understood it fully in 1963 and made an
example of it in treating Hotchkins
disease it would take decades for a
generation of oncologists to come to the
same realization an Army on the March
now we are an Army on the March
Sydney Farber in
1963 The Next Step the complete cure is
Almost sure to follow Kenneth Endicott
NCI director
1963 the role of aggressive multiple
drug therapy in the Quest for long-term
survival in cancer is far from Clear R
Stein a scientist in
1969 one afternoon in the late summer of
1963 George canelo's
then a senior fellow at the NCI walked
into the clinical Center to find Tom
free scribbling furiously on one of the
institute's blackboards free in his long
white coat was making lists of chemicals
and drawing arrows on one side of the
board was a list of cytotoxic drug cytox
Vin Christine
procarbazine Methotrexate on the other
side was a list of new cancers that
Zuber and free wanted to Target breast
ovarian lung cancers lymphomas
connecting the two halves of the
Blackboard were chalky lines matching
combinations of cytotoxic drugs to
cancers for a moment it almost looked as
if free had been deriving mathematical
equations a plus b kills c e+ f
eliminates G the drugs on freeze list
came largely from three sources some
such as aminopterin or Methotrexate were
the products of inspired guesswork by
scientists
Farber had discovered aminopterin by
guessing that an antifolate might block
the growth of leukemia cells others such
as nitrogen mustard or aomy D came from
serendipitous sources such as mustard
gas or soil bacteria found accidentally
to kill cancer cells yet others such as
6mp came from drug screening efforts in
which thousands of molecules were tested
to find the handful that possessed
cancer killing activity the notable
common feature that linked all these
drugs was that they were all rather
indiscriminate Inhibitors of cellular
growth nitrogen mustard for instance
damages DNA and kills nearly all
dividing cells it kills cancer cells
somewhat preferentially because cancer
cells divide most actively to design an
ideal anti-cancer drug one would need to
identify a specific molecular Target in
a cancer cell and create a chemical to
attack that Target but the fundamental
biology of cancer was so poorly
understood that defining such molecular
targets was virtually inconceivable in
the
1960s yet even lacking such targets free
and frerich had cured leukemia in some
children even generic cellular poisons
dosed with adequate Brio could thus
eventually obliterate cancer the bravado
of that logic was certainly hypnotic
Vincent deita another fellow at The
Institute during that time wrote a new
breed of cancer investigators in the
1960s had been addressing the generic
question of whether or not cytotoxic
chemotherapy was ever capable of curing
patients with any type of advanced
malignancies for free and zuid the only
way to answer that generic question was
to direct the growing armamentarium of
combination chemotherapy against another
cancer a solid tumor this time which
would retrace their steps with leukemia
if yet another kind of cancer responded
to this strategy then there could be
little doubt that oncology had stumbled
upon a generic solution to the generic
problem a cure would then be within
reach for all cancers but which cancer
would be used to test the principle like
Kaplan Zub Dita and Canelo also focused
on Hodgkins disease a cancer that lived
on the IL defined cusp between solid and
liquid a stepping stone between leukemia
and say lung cancer or breast cancer at
Stanford Kaplan had already demonstrated
that Hodgkins lymphoma could be staged
with exquisite precision and that local
disease could be cured with high dose
extended field radiation Kaplan had
solved half the equation he had used
local therapy with radiation to cure
localized forms of Hotchkins disease if
metastatic Hotchkins disease could be
cured by systemic and aggressive
combination chemotherapy then zub's
generic solution would begin to sound
plausible the equation would be fully
solved outspoken pugnacious and bold a
child of the Rough and Tumble Yonker
area of New York who had bulldozed his
way through college and medical school
Vincent Devita had come to the NCI in
1963 and fallen into the intoxicating
orbit of Zub free and frerich the
unorthodoxy of their approach The
Maniacs doing cancer research as he
called it had instantly fascinated him
these were the Daredevils of medical
research acrobats devising new drugs
that nearly killed patients these men
played chicken with death somebody had
to show the Skeptics that you could
actually cure cancer with the right
drugs he believed in the early months of
1964 he set out to prove the Skeptics
wrong the first test of intensive
combination chemotherapy for advanced
stage Hotchkins disease led by Dita
combined four drugs Methotrexate Vin
Christine also called anavin nitrogen
mustard and prednizone a highly toxic
cocktail called mom only 14 patients
were treated all suffered the
predictable consequences of combination
chemotherapy all were hospitalized and
confined in isolation Chambers to
prevent infections during the
life-threatening drop in blood counts as
expected the regimen was sharply
criticized at the
NCI this again was a Quantum Leap into a
deadly world of mixed poisons but free
intervened silencing the critics and
allowing the program to continue in
1964 Dita modified the regimen further
methat rex8 was substituted with a more
powerful agent procarbazine and the
duration of treatment was lengthened
from 2 and a half months to 6 months
with a team of young like-minded fellows
at the NCI Dita began to enroll patients
with Advanced Hotchkins disease in a
trial of this new cocktail called mop
like lymphoblastic leukemia hodkin
disease is a rare Illness but the
researchers did not need to look hard
Define patients Advanced Hodgkins
disease often accompanied by the
spectral b symptoms was uniformly fatal
young men and women the disease
typically strikes men and women in their
20s and 30s were often referred to the
NCI as hopeless cases and therefore
ideal experimental subjects in just 3
years Dita and canelo's thus accumulated
cases at a furious clip 43 patients in
all nine had been blasted with
increasing fields of radi ation alapan
and still progressed inexorably to
disseminated widely metastatic disease
others had been treated with an ad hoc
mix of single agents none had shown any
durable response to Prior drugs so like
the younger band of leukemic that had
gone before them a fresh new cohort
appeared at The Institute every two
weeks occupying the plastic chairs of
the clinical Center lining up for the
government issued cookies and awaiting
the terrifying onslaught of the
experimental drugs the youngest was 12
not even a teenager yet with lymphoma
cells packed in her lungs and liver a
13-year-old boy had Hodgkins in his
plural cavity malignant fluid had
compressed itself into the lining
between his chest wall and Lung and made
it hard to breathe the oldest was a
69-year-old woman with Hodgkins disease
choking off the entrance to her
intestine if the terror of Vamp was
death by infection children slumped on
ventilators with no white blood cells to
speak of and bacteria streaming in their
blood then the terror of mop was more
visceral death by nausea the nausea that
accompanied the therapy was devastating
it appeared suddenly then abetted just
as suddenly almost capable of snapping
the mind shut with its intensity many of
the patients on the protocol were flown
in from nearby cities every Fortnight
the trip back home with the drugs
lurching in the blood and the plane
lurching in the air was for many a
nightmare even worse than their disease
the nausea was merely a Harbinger as
Dita charged ahead with combination
chemotherapy more complex and novel
devastations were revealed chemotherapy
caused permanent sterility in men and
some women the annihilation of the
immune system by the cytotoxic drugs
allowed peculiar infections to sprout up
the first adult case of a rare form of
pneumonia caused by an organism pumac
syus karanai PCP was observed in a
patient receiving mop the same pneumonia
arising spontaneously in immune
compromised gay men in 1981 would augur
the arrival of the HIV epidemic in
America perhaps the most disturbing side
effect of chemotherapy would emerge
nearly a decade later several young men
and women cured of Hodgkins disease
would relapse with a second cancer
typically an aggressive drug-resistant
leukemia caused by the prior treatment
with mop chemotherapy as with radiation
cytotoxic chemotherapy would thus turn
out to be a double-edged sword cancer
curing on one hand and cancer causing on
the other but the evidently Grim Litany
of side effects notwithstanding even
early in the course of treatment there
was payoff in many of the young men and
women the palpable swollen lymph nodes
dissolved in weeks a 12-year-old boy boy
from Illinois had been so ravaged by
Hotchkins that his weight had sunk to 50
lbs within 3 months of treatment he
gained nearly half his body weight and
shot up 2 feet in height in others the
strangle hold of Hotchkins disease
loosened on the organs plural affusions
gradually cleared and the nodes in the
gut disappeared as the months passed it
was clear that combination chemo had
struck gold once again at the end of
half a year 35 of the 43 patients had
achieved a complete remission the mop
trial did not have a control group but
one was not needed to discern the effect
the response and remission rate were
unprecedented for advanced Hotchkins
disease the success would continue in
the long term more than half the initial
cohort of patients would be cured even
Kaplan not an early believer in
chemotherapy was astonished some of the
patients with advanced disease have now
survived relapse free he wrote the
Advent of multiple drug chemotherapy has
dramatically changed the prognosis of
patients with previously untreated stage
three or stage 4 Hodgkins disease in May
1968 as the mop trial was ascending to
its unexpected Crescendo there was
equally unexpected news in the world of
lymphoblastic L leukemia free and Fry's
Vamp regimen had trailed off at a
strange and Bleak point combination
chemo had cured most of the children of
leukemia in their blood and bone marrow
but the cancer had explosively relapsed
in the brain in the months following
Vamp in
1962 most of these children had hobbled
back to the clinic with seemingly
innocuous neurological complaints and
then spiraled furiously toward their
deaths just a week or two afterward Vamp
once widely touted as the institute's
success story had turned instead into
its Progressive nightmare of the 15
patients treated on the initial protocol
only two still survived at the NCI the
ambition and bravado that had spurred
the original studies was rapidly tipping
toward a colder reality perhaps farber's
critics had been right perhaps
lymphoblastic leukemia was a disease
that could at best be sent into a
flickering remission but never cured
perhaps paliative care was the best
option after all but having tasted the
success of high-doses chemotherapy many
oncologists could not scale back their
optimism what if even Vamp had not been
intensive enough what if a chemotherapy
regimen could be muscled up further
pushed closer to the brink of
tolerability the leader of this
gladiatorial Camp was a protege of
farers a 36-year-old oncologist Donald
pinkle who had been recruited from
Boston to start a leukemia program in
Memphis Tennessee in many ways Memphis
was the antipode of Boston convulsing
with bitter racial tensions and rock and
roll music gting between the gold and
pink of the graand mansion in its South
and the starkly segregated black
neighborhoods in its North Memphis was
turbulent unpredictable colorful
perennially warm and medically speaking
virtually in no man's land pinkle new
hospital called St Judes named aptly
enough after the patron saint of lost
cause bues Rose like a marooned concrete
starfish out of a concrete parking lot
on a barren field in
1961 when pinkle arrived the hospital
was barely functional with no track
record uncertain finances an unfinished
building no employees or faculty still
pinkle got a chemotherapy Ward up and
running with nurses residents and
fellows trained in administering the
toxic Mercurial drugs and flung far from
the centers of leukemia research in New
York and Boston pinkle team was
determined to outdo every other leukemia
trial The Edge outm moding the center to
push the logic of high-doses combination
chemotherapy to its extreme pinkle thus
hammered away in trial after trial
edging his way toward the outer limit of
tolerability and pinkle and his
collaborators emerged with four crucial
Innovations to the prior regimens doir
pinkle reasoned that while combinations
of drugs were necessary to induce
remissions combinations were
insufficient in themselves perhaps one
needed combinations of combination six
seven or even eight different chemical
poisons mixed and matched together for
maximum effect second since the nervous
system relapses had likely occurred
because even these highly potent
chemicals could not breach the bloodb
brain barrier perhaps one needed to
instill chemotherapy directly into the
nervous system by injecting it into the
fluid that bathes the spinal cord third
perhaps even that installation was not
not enough since x-rays could penetrate
the brain regardless of the bloodbrain
barrier perhaps one needed to add high
does radiation to the skull to kill
residual cells in the brain and finally
as minchi had seen with choc carcinoma
perhaps one needed to continue
chemotherapy not just for weeks and
months as free and frech had done but
for month after month stretching into
two or even 3 years the treatment
protocol that emerged from these guiding
principles could only be described as as
one of pinkle colleagues called it an
allout combat to start with the standard
antileukemic drugs were given in Rapid
Fire succession then at defined
intervals Methotrexate was injected into
the spinal canal using a spinal tap the
brain was irradiated with high doses of
x-rays then chemotherapy was bolstered
even further with higher doses of drugs
and alternating intervals in maximum
tolerated doses antibiotic and
transfusions were usually needed often
in succession often for weeks on end the
treatment lasted up to 2 and A2 years it
involved multiple exposures to radiation
scores of blood tests dozens of spinal
taps and multiple intravenous drugs a
strategy so precise and demanding that
one Journal refused to publish it
concerned that it was impossible to even
dose it and monitor it correctly without
killing several patients in the trials
even at St Jude's the regimen was
considered so so overwhelmingly toxic
that the trial was assigned to
relatively Junior Physicians under
pinkle supervision because the senior
researchers knowing its risks did not
want to run it pinkle called it total
therapy as fellows we called it total
hell Carla Reed entered this form of
Hell in the summer of 2004 chemotherapy
and radiation came backto back one dark
tide after another some days she got
home in the evening her children already
in bed her husband waiting with dinner
only to turn around and come back the
next morning she lost sleep her hair and
her appetite and then something more
important and ineffable her animus her
drive her will she walked around the
hospital like a zombie shuffling in
small Steps From the blue vinyl couch in
the infusion room to the water dispenser
in the central Corridor then back to the
couch in those evenly measured steps the
radiation treatment was the last straw
she recalled lying on the treatment
table as still as death with the mask on
my face I often wondered whether I would
even wake up even her mother who had
flown in and out of Boston regularly
during Carla's first month of treatment
retreated to her own house in Florida
redyed and exhausted Carla withdrew even
more deeply into her own world her
Melancholy hardened into something
impenetrable a carapace and she pulled
into to it instinctually shutting
everything out she lost her friends
during her first few visits I noticed
that she often brought a cheerful young
woman as a companion one morning I
noticed that the friend was missing no
company today I asked Carla looked away
and Shrugged her shoulders we had a
falling out there was something Steely
mechanical in her voice she needed to be
needed and I just couldn't fulfill that
demand not now I found myself
embarrassingly enough sympathizing with
the missing friend as Carla's doctor I
needed to be needed as well to be
acknowledged even as a peripheral
participant in her battle but Carla had
barely any emotional energy for her own
recuperation and certainly none to spare
for the needs of others for her the
struggle with leukemia had become so
deeply personalized so interiorized that
the rest of us were ghostly onlookers in
the periphery we were the zombies
walking outside her head her clinic
visits began and ended with awkward
pauses walking across the hospital in
the morning to draw yet another bone
marrow biopsy with the wintry light
cross-hatching the rooms I felt a
certain dread descend on me a heaviness
that bordered on sympathy but never
quite achieved it test came after test 7
months into her course Carla had now
visited the clinic 66 times had had 58
blood tests seven spinal taps and
several bone marrow biopsies one writer
a former nurse described the typical
course of total therapy in terms of the
tests involved from the time of his
diagnosis Eric's illness had lasted 628
days he had spent one quarter of these
days either in a hospital bed or
visiting the doctors he had received
more than 800 blood tests numerous
spinal and Bone marap
30 x-rays 120 biochemical tests and more
than 200 transfusions no fewer than 20
doctors hematologists pulmonologists
neurologists surgeons Specialists and so
on were involved in his treatment not
including the psychologist and a dozen
nurses how pinkle and his team convinced
four and six-year-olds in Memphis to
complete that typical routine remains a
mystery in its own right but he did in
July 1968 the St judee's team published
its preliminary data on the results of
the most advanced iteration of total
therapy pinkle team would run eight
consecutive trials between 1968 and
1979 each adding another modification to
the regimen this particular trial an
early variant was non-randomized in
Small a single hospitals experience with
a single cohort of patients but despite
all the caveats the result was
electrifying the Memphis team had
treated 31 patients in all 27 of them
had attained a full remission the median
time to relapse the time between
diagnosis and relapse a measure of the
efficacy of treatment had stretched out
to nearly 5 years more than 20 times the
longest remissions achieved by most of
farber's first patients but most
important 13 patients about a third of
the original cohort had never relapsed
they were still alive off chemotherapy
the children had come back to the clinic
month after month the longest remission
was now in its sixth year half the
lifetime of that child in
1979 pinkle team Revisited the entire
cohort of patients treated over several
years with total therapy overall 278
patients in eight consecutive trials had
completed their courses of medicines and
stopped chemotherapy of those about 1/5
had relapsed the rest 80% remained
disease free after chemotherapy cured as
far as anyone could tell all in children
cannot be considered an incurable
disease pinkle wrote in a review article
pation is no longer an acceptable
approach to its initial treatment he was
writing to the future of course but in a
more mystical sense he was writing back
to the past to the doctors who had been
deeply nihilistic about therapy for
leukemia and had once argued with Farber
to let his children quietly die in peace
although trained in Boston under Farber
pinkle had spent several years at the
Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo
New York before moving to Memphis in
1961 the Roswell Park group led by James
Holland and Joseph burchel at the
Memorial Hospital in New York continued
to collaborate with pinkle in developing
the leukemia protocols the cart and the
horse I am not opposed to optimism but I
am fearful of the kind that comes from
self- delusion Marvin Davis in the New
England Journal of Medicine talking
about the cure for cancer the iron is
hot and this is the time to pound
without cessation Sydney Farber to Mary
Lasker September
1965 one swallow is a coincidence but
two swallows make summer by the Autumn
of
1968 as the trials in Bethesda and in
Memphis announced their noteworthy
successes the landscape of cancer
witnessed a seismic shift in the late
50s as Dita recalled it took plain old
courage to be a
chemotherapist and certainly the courage
of the conviction that cancer would
eventually succumb to drugs clearly
proof was necessary just a decade later
the burden of proof had begun to shift
dramatically The Cure of lymphoblastic
leukemia with hos chemotherapy might
have been dismissed as a biological
fluke but the success of the same
strategy in hodkin's disease made it
seem like a general principle a
revolution has been set in motion Dita
wrote Kenneth Endicott the NCI director
concurred The Next Step the complete
cure is Almost sure to follow in Boston
Farber greeted the news by celebrating
the way he knew Best Buy throwing a
massive public party the symbolic date
for the party was not hard to come by in
September 1968 the Jimmy fund turned 21
Farber recasts the occasion as the
symbolic 21st birthday of Jimmy a Coming
of Age moment for his child with cancer
the Imperial Ballroom of The Statler
Hotel outside which the variety Club had
once positioned its baseball shaped
donation box for Jimmy in the 1950s was
outfitted for a colossal celebration the
guest list included farber's typically
glitzy retinue of Physicians scientists
philanthropists and politicians Mary
Lasker couldn't attend the event but she
sent Elmer bobst from the ACs Zuber flew
up from the NCI Kenneth Endicott came
from Bethesda conspicuously missing from
the list was the original Jimmy himself
inar gustaffson Farber knew of Jimmy's
whereabouts he was alive and well Farber
told the Press opaquely but deliberately
chose to shroud the rest in anonymity
Jimmy Farber insisted was an icon and
abstraction the real Jimmy had returned
to a private cloistered life on a farm
in rural Maine where he now lived with
his wife and three children his restored
normaly a sign of Victory against cancer
he was 32 years old no one had seen or
photographed him for nearly two decades
at the end of the evening as the demitas
cups were being wheeled away Farber Rose
to the stage in the full glare of the
lights Clinic he said now stood at the
most fortunate time in the history of
science and medicine institutions and
individuals Across the Nation the
variety Club the motion picture industry
the Boston Braves the Red Sox the World
of Sports the press the television the
radio had come together around cancer
what was being celebrated in the
ballroom that evening Farber announced
was not an individual's birthday but the
birth of a once baguer community that
clustered around a disease that
Community now felt on the verge of a
breakthrough as Dita described it the
missing piece of the therapeutic puzzle
effective chemotherapy for systemic
cancers had been discovered high does
combination chemotherapy would cure all
cancers once the right combinations had
been found the chemical Arsenal one
writer noted now in the hands of
prescribing Physicians gives them every
bit as much power as the heroic surgeon
wielding the knife at the turn of the
century the prospect of a systematic
solution to a cure intoxicated
oncologists it equally intoxicated the
political forces that had converged
around cancer potent hungry and
expansive the word War captured the
essence of the anti-cancer campaign Wars
demand combatants weapons Soldiers the
wounded survivors bystanders
collaborators strategists Sentinels
victories and it was not hard to find a
metaphorical analog to each of these for
this war as well Wars also demand a
clear definition of an enemy they imbue
even formless adversaries with forms so
cancer a shape-shifting disease of
colossal diversity was recast as a
single monolithic entity it was one
disease as Isaiah fidler the influential
Houston oncologist described succinctly
cancer had to possess one cause one
mechanism and one cure if clinical
oncologists had multi-drug
cytotoxic chemotherapy to offer as their
unifying solution for cancer one cure
then cancer scientists had their own
Theory to advance for its unifying cause
viruses the grandfather of this theory
was Payton Rouse a stooping white-haired
chicken virologist who had been roosting
quietly in a laboratory at the
Rockefeller Institute ude in New York
until he was dragged out of relative
Oblivion in the 1960s in 1909 note that
date Hallstead had just wrapped up his
study of the mastectomy Neely was yet to
advertise his reward for the cure for
cancer then a 30-year-old scientist
freshly launching his lab at the
Rockefeller Institute Payton Rouse had
been brought a tumor growing on the back
of a hen of a black and white species of
chicken called pth Rock a rare tumor in
a chicken might have left others
unimpressed but the Inda Rouse secured a
$200 Grant to study the chicken cancer
soon he had categorized the tumor as a
saroma a cancer of the connective
tissues with sheet upon sheet of
rhomboid foxy cells invading the tendons
and muscle Rouse's initial work on the
chicken saroma was thought to have
little relevance to human cancers in the
1920s the only known causes of human
cancer were environmental carcinogens
such as radium recall Marie's leukemia
or or organic chemicals such as paraffin
and die byproducts that were known to
cause solid tumors in the late 18th
century an English surgeon named prival
pot had argued that cancer of the
scrotum endemic among chimney sweeps was
caused by chronic exposure to chimney
suot and smoke we will meet pot again in
subsequent Pages these observations had
led to a theory called the somatic
mutation hypothesis of cancer the
somatic theory of cancer argued that
environmental carcinogens such as soot
or radium somehow permanently altered
the structure of the cell and thus
caused cancer but the precise nature of
the alteration was unknown clearly soot
paraffin and radium possessed the
capacity to alter a cell in some
fundamental way to generate a malignant
cell but how could such a diverse range
of insults all converge on the same
pathological insult perhaps a more
systematic explanation was missing a
deeper more fundamental theory of
carcinogenesis in 1910 unwittingly Rouse
through the somatic Theory into grave
doubt experimenting with the spindle
cell saroma Rouse injected the tumor in
one chicken into another chicken and
found that the cancer could be
transmitted from one bird to another I
have propagated a spindle cell saroma of
the common fowl into its fourth
generation he wrote the neoplasm grows
rapidly infiltrates metastas sizes and
remains true to type this was curious
but nonetheless still understandable
cancer was a disease of cellular origin
and transferring cells from one organism
to another might have been expected to
transmit the cancer but then Rouse
stumbled on an even more peculiar result
shuttling tumors from one bird to
another he began to pass the cells
through a set of filters a series of
finer and finer cellular seves until the
cells had been eliminated from the mix
and all that that was left was the
filtrate derived from the cells Rouse
expected the tumor transmission to stop
but instead the tumors continued
propagating with a ghostly efficacy at
times even increasing in
transmissibility as the cells had
progressively vanished the agent
responsible for carrying the cancer
Rouse concluded was not a cell or an
environmental carcinogen but some tiny
particle lurking within a cell the
particle was so small that it could
easily pass through most fil and keep
producing cancer in animals the only
biological particle that had these
properties was a virus his virus was
later called Rouse saroma virus or RSV
for short the discovery of RSV the first
cancer-causing virus f a deep blow to
the somatic mutation Theory and set off
a frantic search for more cancer viruses
the causal agent for cancer it seemed
had been found in
1935 a colleague of Rouse named Richard
schop reported a papala virus that
caused wart-like tumors in cottontail
rabbits 10 years later in the mid 1940s
came news of a leukemia causing virus in
mice and then in cats but still no sign
of a Bonafide cancer virus in humans in
1958 after nearly a three- decade effort
the hunt finally yielded an important
prize an Irish surgeon Dennis burket
discovered an aggressive form of
lymphoma now called burket's lymphoma
that occurred endemically among children
in the malaria ridden belt of subsaharan
Africa the pattern of distribution
suggested an infectious cause when two
British virologists analyzed the
lymphoma cells from Africa they
discovered an infectious agent lodged
inside them not malaria parasites but a
human cancer virus the new virus was
named Epstein bar virus or EBV EBV is
more familiar to us as the virus that
causes infection mononucleosis or mono
the grand total of cancer-causing
viruses in humans now stood at one but
the modesty of that number aside the
cancer virus theory was in full Spate
now in part because viruses were the new
rage in all of medicine viral diseases
having been considered incurable for
centuries were now becoming potentially
preventable the polio vaccine introduced
in the summer of 1952 had been a
phenomenal success and the notion that
cancer and infectious diseases could
eventually collapse into a single
pathological entity was simply too
seductive to resist cancer may be
infectious a Life Magazine cover piece
asserted in
1962 Rouse received hundreds of letters
from anxious men and women asking about
exposures to cancer-causing bacteria or
viruses speculation soon inched toward
hysteria and fear if cancer was
infectious some wondered why not
quarantine patients to prevent vent it
spread why not send cancer patients to
sanitation Wards or isolation facilities
where TB and small poox victims had once
been confined one woman who believed
that she had been exposed to a coughing
lung cancer patient wrote is there
something I can do to kill the cancer
germ can the rooms be
fumigated should I give up my lease and
move out if the cancer germ had infected
one space most acutely it was the
imagination of the public and equally
the imagination of researchers Farber
turned into a particularly fervent
believer in the early 1960s goed by his
insistence the NCI inaugurated a special
virus cancer program a systematic hunt
for human cancer viruses patterned
explicitly after the chemotherapy
Discovery program the project snowballed
into public prominence Gathering
enormous support hundreds of monkeys at
the NCI funded lab were inoculated with
human tumors with the hopes of turning
the monkeys into viral incubators for
vaccine development unfortunately the
monkeys failed to produce even a single
cancer virus but nothing dimmed the
optimism over the next decade the cancer
virus program siphoned away more than
10% of the NCI contract budget nearly
$500 million in contrast the institute's
cancer nutrition program meant to
evaluate the role of diet in cancer a
question of at least equal import
received 12th of that allocation pton
Rouse was rehabilitated into the
scientific mainstream and levitated into
permanent scientific sainthood in 1966
having been overlooked for a full 55
years he was awarded the Nobel Prize for
physiology and medicine on the evening
of December 10th at the ceremony in
Stockholm he rose to the podium like a
resurrected Messiah Rouse acknowledged
in his talk that the virus theory of can
answer still needed much more work and
Clarity relatively few viruses have any
connection with the production of
neoplasms Rouse said but Bulldog is and
unwilling to capitulate Rouse lambasted
the idea that cancer could be caused by
something inherent to the cells such as
a genetic mutation a favorite
explanation has been that enogen cause
alterations in the genes of the cells of
the body somatic mutations as these are
termed but numerous facts when taken
together decisively exclude this
supposition he groused elsewhere what
have been the fruits of this somatic
mutation
hypothesis most serious of all the
results of the somatic mutation
hypothesis has been its effect on
Research workers it acts as a
tranquilizer on those who believe it
Rouse had his own tranquilizer to offer
a unifying hypothesis that viruses
caused cancer and many in his audience
in no mood for caveats and complexities
were desperate to swallow his medicine
the somatic mutation theory of cancer
was dead the scientists who had studied
environmental carcinogenesis needed to
think of other explanations why radium
or sup might cause cancer perhaps the
virus theorists reasoned these insults
activated endogenous viruses two
superficial theories were thus stitched
audaciously and premature surely into
one comprehensive hole one offered a
cause viruses caused cancer although a
vast majority of them were yet
undiscovered the second offered a cure
particular combinations of cytotoxic
poisons would cure cancer although
specific combinations for the vast
majority of cancers were yet
undiscovered viral carcinogenesis
clearly demanded a deeper
explanation how might virus's Elemental
microbes floating from cell to cell
cause so profound a change in a cell's
physiology as to create a malignant cell
the success of cytotoxic chemotherapy
provoked equally fundamental questions
why had a series of rather General
poisons cured some forms of cancer while
leaving other forms completely inscathed
obviously a more fundamental explanation
lurked beneath all of this an
explanation that would connect cause and
cure so some researchers urged patience
diligence and time
the program directed by the National
Cancer Institute has been derided as one
that puts the cart before the horse by
searching for a cure before knowing the
cause Kenneth Endicott the NCI director
acknowledged in
1963 we have certainly not found a cure
for cancer we have a dozen chemicals
which are somewhat better than those
known before the program began but none
are dramatically better they prolong the
patient's life somewhat and make him
more comfortable but that is all but the
lorites had little time for such nuanced
descriptions of progress this cart would
have to drag the horse the iron is hot
and this is the time to pound without
cessation Farber wrote to Lasker the
groundwork for an allout battle had
already been laid all that was necessary
was to put pressure on Congress to
release funds no large Mission or goal
directed effort against cancer supported
with adequate funds has ever been
organized Mary Lasker announced in an
open letter to Congress in
1969 lasker's thoughts were echoed by
Solomon Garb a little-known professor of
pharmacology at the University of
Missouri who shot to prominence by
publishing the book cure for cancer a
national goal in
1968 the theme of this book Garb began
is that the time has come for a closer
look at cancer research and for a new
consolidation of effort aimed at cure or
control of cancer a major hindrance to
cancer effort has been a chronic severe
shortage of funds a situation that is
not generally recognized it is not
enough however to point this out or to
repeat it it is also necessary to
explain how additional funds would be
used what projects they would pay for
why such projects deserve support and
where the skilled scientists and
technicians to do the work would come
from garbs book was described as a
springboard to progress and the lasit
certainly sprang as with Farber a
doctor's word was the ultimate
prescription that Garb had prescribed
precisely the strategy advocated by the
lascarides instantly transformed him in
their eyes into a Messianic figure his
book became their Bible religious
movements and Cults are often founded on
a tetrad of elements a prophet a
prophecy a book and a revelation by the
summer of
1969 the can Crusade had acquired three
of these four Essential Elements its
Prophet was Mary Lasker the woman who
had guided it out of the dark Wilderness
of the 1950s into National prominence
just two decades later this prophecy was
the cure for childhood lukemia
inaugurated by farber's experiments in
Boston and ending with pinkle
astonishing successes in Memphis this
book was garbs cure for cancer the final
missing element was a revelation a sign
that would a the future and capture the
imagination of the public in the spirit
of all great Revelations this one would
also appear unexpectedly and mystically
out of the blue it would Apparition
quite literally from the heavens at 417
p.m. eastern Daylight Time on July 20th
1969 a 15-ton spacecraft moved silently
through the cold thin atmosphere above
the Moon and landed on a Rocky Basalt
crater on the lunar surface a vast
Barren landscape a magnificent
desolation stretched out around the
spacecraft it suddenly struck me one of
the two astronauts would recall that
that tiny PE pretty and blue was the
earth I put up my thumb and shut one eye
and my thumb blotted out the planet on
that psize blue planet glimmering on the
horizon this was a moment of Reckoning
it was a stunning scientific and
intellectual accomplishment timer
reported in July
1969 for a creature who in the space of
a few million years in instant in
evolutionary chronology emerged from
Primeval forests to hurl himself at the
stars it was in any event a shining
reaffirmation of the optimistic premise
that whatever man imagines he can bring
to pass the cancer Crusaders could not
have asked for a more exuberant
Vindication for their own project here
was another programmatic effort planned
targeted goal Orient oriented and
intensely focused that had delivered its
results in record time when Max
the famously tacern engineer of the
Apollo program was later asked to
comment on the principal scientific
challenge of the moonlanding he could
only come up with a single word
propulsion the impression was that the
moonwalk had turned out to be a
technological Cakewalk no more
complicated than building a more
powerful Jet Plane magnifying its
several dozen fold and pointing it
vertically at the Moon the lorites
transfixed in front of their flickering
television sets in Boston Washington and
New York on the evening of the
moonlanding were primed to pick up on
all these analogies like they
believed that the missing element in the
cancer Crusade was some sort of
propulsion a simple internal vertical
thrust that would transform the scale
and scope of their efforts and catapult
them toward the Cure in fact the missing
propulsion they believed had finally
been found the SU ESS against childhood
leukemia and more recently Hodgkins
disease stood out as proofs of principle
the first hesitant explorations of a
vast unexplored space cancer like the
moon was also a landscape of magnificent
desolation but a landscape on the verge
of Discovery in her letters Mary Lasker
began to refer to a programmatic war on
cancer as the conquest of Inner Space as
opposed to outer space instantly
unifying the two projects the moon
landing thus marked a turning point in
the life cycle of the cancer crusade in
the past the lorites had concentrated
much of their efforts on political
lobbying in Washington when
advertisements or posters had been
pitched directly to the public they had
been mainly educational the lorites had
preferred to maneuver backstage
preferring political advocacy to public
advocacy but by 1969 po ICS had changed
liser Hill the Alabama Senator and one
of Mary lasker's strongest supporters
was retiring after several decades in
the Senate Senator Edward Kennedy
farber's Ally from Boston was so deeply
embroiled in the Chapa scandal in July
1969 a car carrying Kennedy and a
campaign worker veered off a Martha's
Vineyard bridge and sank underwater
drowning his passenger Kennedy was tried
for manslaughter although eventually
acquitted that he had virtually
disappeared into legislative Oblivion
the larit were now doubly orphaned we're
in the worst Lasker recalled we're back
to a phase that we were in the early 50s
when we had no friend in the Senate we
went on constantly but no effective
sympathy with their voices now muted in
Washington with little sympathy in the
house and no friend in the Senate the
lasit were forced to revamp the strategy
for their Crusade from backstage
political maneuvering to front stage
public mobilization in retrospect that
turn